論文タイトル: Hall & Davis (2007) - Value-based Decision-making Model
================================================================================

DecisionSupportSystems43(2007)1588–1604
www.elsevier.com/locate/dss
Engaging multiple perspectives: A value-based
decision-making model
⁎
Dianne J. Hall a, , Robert A. Davis b,1
a DepartmentofManagement,AuburnUniversity,401LowderBusinessBuilding,Auburn,AL36849-5241,UnitedStates
b DepartmentofComputerInformationSystems,TexasStateUniversity-SanMarcos,SanMarcos,TX78666-4616,UnitedStates
Availableonline24April2006
Abstract
Insomedecisioncontexts,suchasacrisisorwhenconfrontedbyanewornovelsetofcircumstances,peoplemaybeforcedto
makedecisionswithlimitedinformationortimeavailableforanalysis.Insuchcontexts,thesetofalternativesolutionsdevelopedmay
begreatlyaffectedbythepersonalvaluesandtheperspectivethosevaluesprecipitate.Beingabletoviewthedecisionenvironment
frommultipleperspectivesenhancesthedecision-maker'sabilitytomakebetter-informedchoices.Thisarticleintroducesthevalue-
baseddecision-makingmodelthatsuggeststhatmultipleperspectivesmaybeachievedbyconsideringafoundationofindividual
values.Empiricaltestingindicatesthatthismodelprovidesaviableframeworkthatdecision-makersandresearcherscanusetobetter
understandandfacilitatemultipleperspectivesindecision-making.
©2006Elsevier B.V. All rightsreserved.
Keywords:Decisionsupport;Multipleperspectivedecision-making;Individualvalues
1. Introduction organizationaldecision-making.Theysuggestthatare-
presentation scheme that allows interpretations to be
Many authors suggest that a key component to ef- compared should be developed. This scheme must be
fective problem formulation and solution is to expand abletostandardizetheperspectivesevidentinindividu-
theproblemsetwithasmanyfactsandassumptionsasis alinterpretations suchthat acommonunderstandingof
reasonable (e.g., [51,53]). Discrepancies, however, are the differences (our emphasis) may happen. From this
likely to occur in the interpretation of those facts, par- common understanding, conflict may be measured,
ticularly in a complex domain where stakeholders may addressed,andreduced.Theauthorssuggestthatanin-
not come from similar backgrounds. Identification of dividual's beliefs form the building block of interpre-
thosediscrepanciesiscriticaltodevelopinganinterpre- tations and therefore may be a potential measure for
tation that is shared among the decision-makers. Hine operationalizing and measuring equivocality.
et al. [28,29] schematically demonstrate the process of Courtney [12] also demonstrates a process of reach-
arriving at a shared interpretation, which then benefits ing a shared interpretation (in his term, shared mental
model) and considers individual beliefs as a basis of
perspectiveinhisparadigmforknowledgemanagement,
⁎
Correspondingauthor.Tel.:+13348446443.
creation,anddecision-making.Hineetal.'s[28,29]ap-
E-mailaddresses:dhall@auburn.edu(D.J.Hall),
proachistorecognizethepotentialfordifferinginterpre-
rd23@txstate.edu(R.A.Davis).
1 Tel.:+15122458676. tationsandtofindwaystomediateandsynthesizethose
0167-9236/$-seefrontmatter©2006ElsevierB.V.Allrightsreserved.
doi:10.1016/j.dss.2006.03.004

D.J.Hall,R.A.Davis/DecisionSupportSystems43(2007)1588–1604 1589
differences, while Courtney [12] actively encourages a inordertoeffectivelycoordinateactionsuchasreaching
number of perspectives in the decision context prior to a decision.This is the shared interpretation outcome of
synthesis. He suggests expanding Mason and Mitroff's interpretivelearning[28,29].
[42] Technical-Organizational-Personal model by add- Shared interpretation requires a method by which
ing aesthetic and ethical perspectives such that manag- individuals agree on a classification scheme for inter-
ers, stakeholders, system designers, and others have a preting factsandvariablesinthedecision context.Cat-
foundationonwhichtosearchforandpromotedifferences. egorizing can lead decision-makers to consider and
While these perspectives are relatively well-defined integrate context-specific information and make better
[10,12,42] and may begin the process of developing a decisions[6,27,50].Categorizationmaybefacilitatedby
representationschemesuchasthatcalledforbyHineet cognitive mapping, atool that allows individualstoor-
al.[28,29],ourresearchgoesastepfurther.Inthisstudy, ganize their beliefs in a manner that increases under-
we propose that all individuals develop perspectives standingoftheirreasoningprocess.Individualvaluesare
basedontheirindividualvaluesandthatarepresentation frequently referred to as cognitive maps [7,17] making
schemeforindividualinterpretationshouldbebasedon themanaturalcandidatenotonlyforcategorization,but
individual values as defined by Spranger [56]. Our re- alsoforoperationalizingbeliefs.Encouragingtheappli-
search motivation is based on the need to understand cationofvalueshasapositiveimpactonorganizational
decision-making behavior, the belief that individual decision-makingbehavior(e.g.,[48,52]).
valuesimpactthatbehavior,andthedesiretodevelopa Value-laden contexts present special problems for
processspecificallytoaddressvalueattunementinsup- negotiating and decision-making, particularly when an
port of interpretive learning and subsequent decision- individual'scorevaluesareprominent[62].Providinga
making. Our value-based decision-making model pre- socialenvironmentinwhichthesevalueconflictsmaybe
sented here provides an environment for encouraging surfaced and addressed may help alleviate biases asso-
multiple value-based perspectives and mediating value ciatedwithvaluesandmediateaffectiveresponsesfrom
conflicts[29,28,62].Thiswillultimatelyprovideanor- individualdecision-makers.Anorganizationthathasthe
ganizationwithavalueattunementprocess[60]thatwill abilitytosurfaceandstoremultiplevalue-basedperspec-
support shared interpretation that is necessary to ef- tiveswillenhanceitsabilitytosolveproblems[60].The
fectivelysolveproblems.Suchamodel,andultimatelya abilitytosurfacethedissentioncreatedbydifferingval-
system or system component based on that model, is a ues (and hence value-based perspectives) is necessary
necessarysteptoextendingdecisionsupportresearch. forinterpretivelearning[28,29].Understandingindivid-
We begin this study by discussing individual values ual values will serve to increase the number of value-
and their place in organizational decision-making. De- based perspectives from which an organization may
velopmentofthevalue-baseddecision-makingmodelis view, interpret, and act on newly acquired information
thendiscussed,followedbyatestofacomponentbased andtocreateknowledge[20,21].
on the properties of the VBDM model. We end with Individual values are an integral part of an indi-
the implications of the model to practice, theory, and vidual's behavior, particularly early in the decision-
research. makingprocessbecausetheyformthefoundationofan
individual'sperspective.Wemaintainthatdecisionsup-
2. Individual values and decision-making port processes and components can be developed that
enhance the use of personal values and promote value
Valuesarediscussedprominentlyintheliteratureal- attunement.However,therehasbeenlimitedresearchin
though there is some disagreement regarding the def- theareaofpersonalvaluesanddecisionsupport,despite
inition and effect of these values. Meglino and Ravlin research suggesting that individual and organizational
[44] define a value as an internalized belief regarding valuesareevidentinorganizationsandthatconflictisa
appropriatebehavior;thisimpacts(amongotherthings) natural outcome of a diverse population [34,52]. When
how an individual interprets information. The authors conflictismediated,theprocessmayleadtosynthesized
conduct a comprehensive review of the literature and perspectivesthatservetoexpandorganizationalmemory
proposeaframeworkforidentifyingandclassifyingex- and further enhance shared interpretation [20,21]. This
istingvaluesresearch,pointingouttheiterativenatureof expandedorganizationalmemoryalsoservestopromote
values and the way that values can influence both per- understandingofanother'sperspective(perspectivetak-
ceptionandbehavior.Theauthorsalsodiscusstheneed ing[8])whichinturnenhancescomprehensiblecommuni-
forindividualstoreachanunderstandingofeachother's cation[38],anotherfacilitatorofsharedcommunication
valuesystems(inSpranger's[56]words,valueprofiles) andinterpretation.

1590 D.J.Hall,R.A.Davis/DecisionSupportSystems43(2007)1588–1604
Researchers have called for additional investigation ganization asa whole.The political value dimensionis
into the human side of decision-making and support. concernedwithprestigeandpower,oftenattheexpense
StohrandKonsynski[58]suggestaframeworkfordeci- ofothers,andincorporatesacriticalandpower-oriented
sion process research which acknowledges the impor- view.Thereligiousvaluedimensionaspirestomakethe
tance of the complexity of people and their individual world a better place, and is based on philosophical and
characteristics and suggest that those characteristics be interpretiveviews.Theaestheticvaluedimensionviews
studied.MeglinoandRavlin[44]indicatethatweknow theworldfromanartistic,interpretiveviewandseeksto
too little about how values affect behavior and call for find form and harmony in a given scenario. The eco-
more attention to decision-making behavior rather than nomic value dimension arises from a functional, prac-
decisionoutcome. ticalviewandseeksusabilityandmaterialgoods.
Following the call for advancing decision support A person may exhibit one strong value such as re-
researchbyfocusingondecisionbehaviorandthechar- ligious, or exhibit a pattern of importance to multiple
acteristics that affect it, we propose that (1) individual values.Forinstance,atypicalmasculinevalueprofileis
values are an integral factor of decision behavior, (2) high on the economic, political, and theoretical dimen-
thosevaluesformthefoundationofanindividual'sper- sions and correspondingly low on the religious, social,
spective during tasks associated with decision-making, and aesthetic ones [1,41]. This deeply ingrained value
(3) that little istruly known about theirimpact, and(4) profile impacts the way that an individual views and
thatadecisionmodelcanbedesignedtosupportavalue interpretstheworldandseeksinformation;theperspec-
attunementprocess.Accordingly,wepresentthedevel- tive based on the profile is the value-based perspective
opment of our value-based decision-making (VBDM) thatisthefocusofthisresearch.Suchadeeplyfounded
model and the initial empirical test results that validate perspective affects decisions by imparting a value bias
theconcept. that is generally not recognized by the individual [18].
Valueprofileshavebeenshowntoremainrelativelysta-
3. Developing the value-based decision-making ticovertime[41],makingthemanappropriateconstruct
model andsupportingtheiruseasameasurementtool.Values,
however,arenotexclusivetoindividuals.
Creatinganenvironmentthatfostersaprocessbothto Organizations exhibit the same types of value pro-
recognize and to synthesize value profiles can be diffi- files,althoughtheeconomicandtheoreticaldimensions
cult.Onebarrieristhedefinitionofindividualvaluesthat areoftenpredominantinbusiness.Infact,itisinteresting
should be considered when designing such an environ- tonotethesimilaritiesbetweentheSpranger[56]value
ment. A second barrier is finding a solid platform on dimensionsandthebusinessvalueclustersadvancedby
whichtobasethedesign.Weaddressthefirstbarrierby Frederick[16].Frederickdefinedfiveclustersofvalues
identifying a value construct suitable for research use, necessaryforbusinessconsideration:economical,envi-
andthesecondbarrierbyselectinganestablishedtheo- ronmental, political, technological, and that comprised
reticalfoundationforourplatform. of values within the individual. Using Spranger's [56]
value dimensions together defines the fifth cluster, but
3.1. Defining the value construct onecanalsoimmediatelyseethesimilaritiesbetweenthe
firstfourbusinessclustersandtheindividualdimensions
Because this study examines value-based perspec- oftheSprangervalueprofile.
tives,itisimportantthatweadequatelydefinewhatwe
meanby“value”andproperlypositionthisworkinthe 3.2. Defining the theoretical foundation
larger context of the study of values. In this work, we
followtheworkofEduardSpranger [56]whobelieved Courtney[12]discussesadecision-makingparadigm
that individuals have a value profile that is based on foruseincomplex,dynamicenvironments.Hesuggests
theoretical,social,political,religious,aesthetic,andeco- theuseofaninquiringorganizationalstructuretoimple-
nomicvalues.Thetheoreticalvaluedimensionisbased mentsuchaparadigm,andmaintainsthat,atthecenterof
onthediscoveryoftruthandknowledgeinarationaland the paradigm, is a structure known as a mental model.
scientific way. This dimension is very functional and Thismodelisguidedbyanindividual'sexperienceand
works best when the situation orproblemcan be struc- value profile that defines the value-based perspective
tured.Thesocialvaluedimensionincorporatesaninter- thatanindividualusestomakesenseofanewproblem
pretive,philanthropicview—itseekshumaninteraction scenario and to generate potential solutions. However,
and considers the impact of action on the group or or- to be effective, a process must be in place that allows

D.J.Hall,R.A.Davis/DecisionSupportSystems43(2007)1588–1604 1591
individualstoexpandtheirmentalmodelsinawaythat viewandthusinterprettheirsurroundingsisimportantto
allows alternative perspectives to be evaluated. This understandingdecision-makingbehaviorandmayallow
research defines a support system designed to evaluate ustopredictbehaviorinaspecificcontext.Thus,itisnot
theeffectivenessofusingindividualvalueprofilesasthe only importantthat we strive tounderstand how value-
basisofperspectivedevelopment.Theremustbeapoint basedperspectivesaffectdecision-making,butalsothat
atwhichmostperspectiveshavebeenacknowledged,as weencourageorganizationstoincorporateasmanyvalue-
one cannot expect all possible perspectives to be rep- based perspectives into a specific context as possible.
resentedineverymentalmodel,whetheritisindividual Mitroff and Linstone [46] suggest a minimum of three
or collective. It may be prudent, therefore, to begin the perspectives (technical, social,and personal); Courtney
process of perspective examination by defining major [12]suggestsaddingethicalandaesthetic.Thisviewis
perspectives from which individuals may approach a also represented by others who maintain that organiza-
decision-making scenario, and include those in the tionsshouldpromoteethicalbehaviorandsocialrespon-
model. sibility(e.g., [55,60]).Wemaintainthatanindividual's
We believe that to truly support the humanness of interpretationofeventsandtheirsubsequentactionsare
organizations as Courtney suggests, we must begin at foundedontheirperspectivethatisdefinedbytheirvalue
the foundation of an individual's beliefs and perspec- profile.Thus,thepertinentperspectivestoaddressmust
tives; that is, their individual values on which beliefs beallofthosethatmakeupanindividual'svalueprofile
are founded and perspectives are framed. This is also (theoretical, social, political, religious, aesthetic, and
in keeping with our second theoretical foundation, the economic).
contention of Hine et al. [28,29] that an individual's To achieve the benefits of multiple perspectives, all
beliefs provide the foundation for their interpretative perspectivesbasedonindividuals'valueprofilesshould
learningprocess.Wearguethatwhenperspectivedevel- berepresentedinadecision-makingscenario.Wemain-
opmenttakesplaceonadeeperlevel,anorganizationis tainthatourfoundationofindividualvaluesenablesan
more likely to consistently surface and mediate value organization to focus on a defined set of perspectives.
conflict. We also believe that perspective development Rather than being different from those perspectives of
andperspectivesynthesisarebothnecessaryandare,in Courtney's model, value-based perspectives are en-
fact, engaged in a reciprocal relationship for any given hancementstothembyformallydefiningeachperspec-
context.Thesebeliefs arethefoundationfor ourvalue- tive.Infact,thereareobviousparallelsbetweenMitroff
baseddecision-making(VBDM)model. and Linstone's technical, organizational, and personal
perspectives and Spranger's value dimensions. For in-
4. The value-based decision-making model stance, like their technical perspective, the theoretical
perspectiveisrationalandfunctional.Likewise,thereare
Given the above discussion, it is easy to see that parallels between Courtney's ethical and aesthetic per-
understandingtheframeworkanindividualdevelopsto spectives and the corresponding value dimensions
Table1
ExtendingMitroffandLinstone'sTOPmodelandCourtney'sparadigmwithSpranger'svalues
Perspectivesinthevalue-baseddecision-makingmodel
Spranger[56] Theoretical Social Political Religious Aesthetic Economic
Mitroffand Technical Organizational Personal
Linstone[46]
Courtney[12] Technical Organizational Personal Ethical Aesthetic
Worldview Scientific,rational Collective, Individual,power Philosophical,moral Artistic Practical
philanthropic
Goal Problemsolving, Action,stability, Power,influence, Equitability,elevation Harmony,artistry Usability,
product process prestige ofmankind pragmatism
Modeofinquiry Functional Interpretive Critical Interpretive Interpretive Functional
General Empirical,rational, Altruistic, Competitive,ego- Moral,ethical,seeks Diverse,appreciates Utilitarian,
characteristics seeksthe“truth” philanthropic,seeks centric,seekspower unitywiththeuniverse beauty,seeksform wealth-oriented,
humaninteraction andharmony seekstangible
goods
Decisioncriteria Bestfittodata Societalgain Individualgain Highestlevel Highestlevelof Highestcost/
ofunderstanding harmonyanddesign benefitratio

1592 D.J.Hall,R.A.Davis/DecisionSupportSystems43(2007)1588–1604
discussed previously (religious and aesthetic, respec- Such a mode is adequate in situations where there are
tively). Each of the value dimensions as suggested by known variables, the problem is at worst moderately
Spranger [56] can form the basis of decision-making unstructured, and a solution is likely to be attained. The
perspectives and together are the foundation of the interpretive mode of inquiry applies a social theory to
VBDMmodelconceptualizedherein.Table1compares information, stressing communication and interpretation
theperspectivesadvancedbyMitroffandLinstone[46] inthesystem.Sociallyorientedknowledgeistheoutcome
andCourtney[12]toourperspectivesthatarebasedon of this perspective which closely parallels interpretive
Spranger's[56]valuetypology. learning[28,29].Thethirdmodeofinquiryisthecritical
Mitroff and Linstone [46] examine several facets of mode;thismodeisconcernedwithexaminingthestatus
thetechnical,organizational,andpersonalperspectives, quo for flaws, conflicts, or contradictions and bringing
such as each perspective's goals and worldview, as those shortcomings to light. Both the interpretive and
well its mode of inquiry and decision criteria. Both of criticalmodesofinquirymanagementaresociallyoriented
Courtney's perspectives (ethical and aesthetic) and the and thereforesupportthe human aspectofa system. On
additional perspectivefrom Spranger's [56] work(eco- the other hand, current approaches to learning and
nomic)canbeexaminedinthesameway.Theworldview decision-makingaredecidedlyfunctional,withapotential
oftheethical(Spranger'sreligious)perspectiveisphilo- toward someelement ofthe interpretive perspective (for
sophical and morally based. The aesthetic perspective instance,groupdecisionsupportsystems).
viewstheworldfromanartisticlens,whiletheeconomic Because value-based perspectives form the basis of
perspective ishighlypragmatic.Each ofthese perspec- an individual's behavior, they must be acknowledged
tiveshasspecificgoalsthatmatchitsworldview. in organizations that wish to surface as many perspec-
The mode of inquiry as discussed by Mitroff and tives as possible in a decision-making context [20,21].
Linstoneisthewaythattheperspectiveviewsaproblem To accomplish this goal, organizations must encourage
andformulatesthesolution.Afunctionalmodeofinquiry interpretive relationships among individuals and celeb-
supportstheideathatorganizationsuseinquirytosupport rate the differences of those individuals. To reduce
or achieve organizational objectives, relying on known conflict between organizational members, these rela-
processes and information to facilitate organizational tionships must exist in an environment where each
goals and minimally increase organizational knowledge. perspective is recognized; this environment must also
Fig.1.Thevalue-baseddecision-makingmodel.

D.J.Hall,R.A.Davis/DecisionSupportSystems43(2007)1588–1604 1593
allow for continuous updating of the collective mental mentalvariables,andthedecision-makers.Factsmaybe
model. Accordingly, Fig. 1 presents the framework of interpreted in a multitude of ways depending on the
the VBDM model. perspective of the interpreter; shared interpretation can
A traditional problem-solving or decision-making only occur when the basis behind the interpretation is
approachistoreacttoproblemrecognition(thetriggerin discussedorwhentheindividualsinvolvedhavealready
Fig.1)byformulatingalternativesolutionsquicklyfrom achievedanunderstandingofeachothers'perspectives.
generally known information (that is, foregoing inves- Each fact to be considered during a particular context
tigation and knowledge creation) and choosing a solu- is discussed, and any conflicts of interpretation must
tiontoimplement.Twoproblemsareassociatedwiththis be resolved with additional information gathered from
method.Thefirstisthatfailuretoinvestigateallperspec- group members, organizational memory, and/or the en-
tivesmayleadtoincorrectorincompleteproblemdefi- vironment.Ideally,thisiterativeprocess(analyze,gath-
nitionoralackofappropriatealternativesolutions.The er,analyze…)continuesuntilthegroupreachesnotonly
secondisthat,veryoften,theprocessofdecision-making a shared interpretation of that fact, but also a deeper
ends with implementation; this lack of feedback may understanding of the social environment in which the
preventoutcome-basedlearning.Courtney's[12]model group is operating. The perspective development (PD)
andourextensionaddressbothproblemsbyadvocating processisdetailedinFig.2.
the use of perspectives and by providing for a continu- An individual's beliefs are based on their value
ouslyupdatedmentalmodel. profileandparalleltheconceptofamentalmodel[12].
CourtneydiscussesthisprocessintermsofaSinger- Theunderlyingfoundationofourmodel(anindividual's
ian“sweepingin”processthatgathersinformationfrom valueprofile)remainsrelativelystable,yetbeliefsbased
anever-wideningsetofstakeholders.Inthisprocess,the onthosevalues(i.e.,mentalmodel)maybemodifiedas
breadthofperspectivesinvolvedinthedecision-making PDtakesplace.Thisinvolvesupdatingbeliefsbasedon
processesincreasessimplybyincreasingtheamountof newly acquired information, considering available op-
input; such breadth may contribute to more informed tions,developingnewintentionsfromthesetofavailable
decisions, but not necessarily to shared interpretation options,andactingonthosenewintentions.This,inturn,
that is fostered by socially constructedinformation and modifies the mental model, and contributes to a shared
understanding. interpretationoftheevents.
Our extension addresses the social construction of Acquiringinformationwithwhichtoanalyzechanges
informationandinterpretationbypromotinganiterative or triggers is dependent in part on the ability to ac-
relationship between organizational memory, environ- cess organizational memory. In the VBDM model,
Fig.2.Perspectivedevelopment.

1594 D.J.Hall,R.A.Davis/DecisionSupportSystems43(2007)1588–1604
organizational memory is represented by two storage acquired and acted on. This may change the shared
areas, the database, and the knowledge base. Facts are interpretationofthegroupandallowsynthesis.Itisalso
storedinthedatabasethatrepresentsexplicitknowledge possible that the item will not reach consensus despite
in organizational memory. Shared interpretations are additional development. Regardless, additional knowl-
ultimately stored in the knowledge base which, over edge has been gained and is reflected in organizational
time, expands organizational memory to include infor- memory.
mation from multiple value-based perspectives and Webelievethatsuchamodel,andacomponentbased
interpretations. Although one decision context will thereon,isanaturalextensionofadecisionsupportsys-
likelyonlydevelopinformationrelevanttothatcontext, temasdescribedbyBonczeketal.[9].Forinstance,the
over time that information may be synthesized to form PDcomponentmaybeplacedbetweentheuserandthe
relevantinformationforothercontexts.Ultimately,each model or between the user and the data. Either way,
decision-maker believes that he or she has developed a exposingtheusertoadditionalperspectiveswillbroaden
shared interpretation of the events, and the process theirinformation-gatheringanddecision-makingscope,
movestowardperspectivesynthesis. allowing for analysis that is more complete. The per-
Theperspectivesynthesisprocesshastwoaspects— spective synthesis component is a natural fit as part of
theproblemspaceinwhichtheproblemisstructuredand themodelcomponent;drawingininformationbasedon
potential alternative solutions are discussed, and the multipleperspectivesandanalyzingittogetherinaway
solutionspacewhereapprovedalternativesolutionsare that allows the best alternatives with more stakeholder
placed.Itisfromthissetthattheeventualsolutionwillbe consideration tobe considered.
chosenandactionwillbetaken.Inthesynthesisprocess, Although interpretive learning and expanding orga-
surfacingofunseenconflictiscriticalandbothconsen- nizational mental models are group-oriented processes,
susandconflictsets[28,29]arenecessary.Fig.3shows initialresearchintoanareaasindividualasvalueprofiles
thedetailsoftheperspectivesynthesisprocess. is best performed at the individual level. Therefore, in
Although each decision-maker believes he or she ordertoshowthatourchosenvalue-profilebasiscanbe
understandstheperspectiveoftheothers,heorshemay usedtomanipulatetheactionsofindividuals,wetesteda
stillnotfullyappreciatetheconflictthateachperspective perspectivedevelopmentcomponentbasedonourmodel
may produce when alternative solutions are suggested. foritsabilitytochangeadecision-maker'sbehavior.
Alternative solutions are divided into two categories—
those that the group agrees are feasible solutions 5. Testing the perspective development component
(consensus set), and those on which there is no con-
sensus (conflict set). Discussion regarding items in the Inthisresearch,acomponenthasbeenimplemented
conflictsetisnecessarytoeither(1)mediatetheconflict, as a user interface that queries motivation behind both
or (2) remove the item from consideration. It is during chosen and unchosen actions in an attempt to develop
thistimethatinteractivitybetweenperspectivedevelop- that individual's knowledge of alternative perspectives
mentandsynthesisismostnoticeable.Whenitemsarein that are often based on differing assumptions, some of
question, it is most natural to secure additional infor- whichmaybeconflicting.Recognizingandconsidering
mation on that item. This returns the decision-making other perspectives exposes any different assumptions
grouptothePDprocess,whereadditionalinformationis that may be influencing stakeholders, allowing the
Fig.3.Perspectivesynthesis.

D.J.Hall,R.A.Davis/DecisionSupportSystems43(2007)1588–1604 1595
decision-maker(s) to determine which assumptions are profile; thus, we are able to estimate their value-based
accurateandconsequentlytoattainabetterunderstand- perspective.Forexample,ifanindividualscoreshighly
ing of the problem at hand. Better understanding on economic and political values (i.e., their profile ex-
typically leads to better decision-making (e.g., hibits stronger concern for these dimensions), we can
[2,15,29]). However, decision-makers often engage in assume that their value-based perspective will be one
the information gathering and choice processes from a thatfocusesonthe“bottomline”andonpower/political
perspective biased by their value profile, and are often issues over,forinstance,thesocial value ofaprogram.
unawarethattheyarebeingaffectedbythem[18]. Value-based judgments are actions taken implicitly or
In some decision contexts, such as a crisis or when explicitlythatarebasedonanindividual'svalueprofile.
confrontedbyanewornovelsetofcircumstances,peo- System performance must be defined within the
plemaybeforcedtomakedecisionswithlimitedinfor- context of its use. For instance, one reasonable perfor-
mation or time available for analysis. In such contexts, mancetestforafunctionalsystem(forinstance,apayroll
the set of alternatives developed, and ultimately the al- system)maybetheaccuracyofitsoutput.Foranexpert
ternativechosen,maybegreatlyaffectedbythepersonal support system, performance may be less well defined
valuesandtheperspectivethosevaluesprecipitate.Be- and be assessed in terms of the organizational perfor-
causeanindividual'sperspectiveaffectsandbiasestheir mancebasedondecision-makingfacilitatedbythesys-
responseindecisionsituations,wemustbuildsystemsto tem.Foracomponentusedwithinacomplexdecision-
helpanindividualconsidermultipleperspectivessothat making scenario, the definition of performance is even
the assumptions of others are surfaced and analyzed, moreilldefined.Inthisresearch,theperformanceofthe
whichinturnmaypromotesharedmentalmodelsanda perspectivedevelopmentsystemwillbecomparedtothat
broadenedorganizationalperspective. ofa controlsystem, and themeasureof performance is
A shared mental model is critical to organizational thesystem'sabilitytoaffectthevalueprofileappliedina
learning and effective group decision-making, but in specific decision context. It is posited that decisions
ordertoarriveatthatstate,theindividualsinvolvedmust made byusersofasystemcontaining aPDcomponent
firstbroadenthescopeoftheirthinkingtounderstandthe will exhibit a change in the value profile applied not
thinking of those around them (e.g., [29]). Further, the evidentinthebehaviorofusersofasystemwithoutsuch
broader the range of perspectives and alternatives con- a component (the control group). Thus, hypothesis one
sidered, the more informed the eventual choice (e.g., is:
[33,61]).Moreinformedchoicesarebetterandresultin
H1. Use of a perspective development component will
more satisfying decisions, all other things being equal
alterthevalueprofileappliedbyanindividualonasub-
(e.g.,[45]).Onewaytobroadenthenumberofperspec-
sequentsimilartask.
tivesusedinadecisioncontextmaybeaccomplishedby
having each participant complete a series of questions Changing the value profile applied to a task may be
regardingthecurrentdecisiondomainfromanumberof accomplishedwithoutspecificallydeviatingfromone's
otherperspectives,perhapsbybeingaskedtoarticulate stated values. It would be possible, for instance, for a
both good and bad points of a given problem or alter- decision-maker to modify their action in response to a
native, thus forcing the issue (e.g., problem or alterna- treatmentwithoutdeviatingfromtheirunderlyingvalue
tive)tobeconsideredfromtwosides(e.g.,[32,49]).This profile. Aspreviousresearchhassuggested, PDshould
istheapproachtakeninthisresearch. allow the decision-maker to envision a wider range of
Becausetheareaofvaluesiscomplexandbroad,and perspectivesand,atleasttemporarily,think“outsidethe
valuesarethefoundationofmanypersonaldecisionsand box.” Therefore, it is posited that being asked to chal-
actions,itisimportanttodefinehowwemeasurevalues lengethestatusquobyconsideringmultipleperspectives
inthecontextofourresearch.Thisresearchacceptsthe of an issue increases the “breadth of concern” ([32],
notion of values as espoused by Spranger, and opera- p. 202) and results in perspective development. Thus,
tionalizes those values by using the Allport–Vernon– hypothesistwois:
Lindzey (AVL) Study of Values [1]. We consider the
H2. Use of a perspective development component will
value profileto bethe pattern of relative importanceof
result in an applied value profile that differs from that
each of Spranger's values (theoretical, social, political,
individual'sstatedvalueprofile.
religious, aesthetic, and economic) to an individual, as
constructed from the results of the AVL instrument. A The subjects used in this study were undergraduate
value-based perspective is the worldview that an indi- studentsatamajorSouthwesternuniversity.Thesesub-
vidualdevelopsasaresultofhisorherunderlyingvalue jectsareappropriateforajudgmentaltaskpertainingto

1596 D.J.Hall,R.A.Davis/DecisionSupportSystems43(2007)1588–1604
Fig.4.Valueprofile(AVL).
values because they are not likely to have experience vidual's value dimensions (theoretical, social, political,
with the requirements of the task, and thus are more religious,aesthetic,andeconomic).Thisinstrumenthas
likelytoreactinstinctively(i.e.,followtheirvalue-based withstood time, three revisions by the authors, and one
perspective) and less likely to consider social norms in recent revision by other researchers [37], who did not
their responses. This is the scenario presented earlier find significant differences in responses between their
when individuals have no information on which to act, instrument and the original one. The task involved the
are in a new situation, and therefore must rely on their disbursement of funds among six community-based
value-basedperspective.Also,becausethetaskrequires programs, each of which corresponds to a value-based
no specific knowledge or training, response bias is un- perspective as determined by Spranger [56]. This task
likely.Studiesofvariousvalueinstrumentsindicatethat wasdevelopedbytheGDSSresearchprojectattheUni-
values can be assessed early in an individual's devel- versity of Minnesota [14], was extensively tested, and
opmentandthatvalue-basedinstrumentsarereliablefor was specifically designed to work with the AVL. The
individualsatthehighschoolleveloraboveanddonot task/AVL combination has been validated in previous
discriminatebasedonage(e.g.,[1,54]).Therefore,itis research (e.g., [63]).Inthis task, subjects must allocate
reasonable to believe that the results of this study will $500,000amongthesixprograms.Allthefundsmustbe
generalize to other populations. Subjects ranged in age allocated; each subject may choose whether to allocate
from19to22andweredistributedacrossallclassifica- all the funds to one program, or split the funds among
tions(freshmantosenior).Businessstudentscomprised twoormoreprograms.Ourresultsindicatethatboththe
61%ofthesample;39%ofthesamplewasmale. instrument and the task functioned as expected in our
An individual's value profile was determined using samplepopulation.
theAllport–Vernon–Lindzey(AVL)StudyofValues[1] Two systems were developed that presented the
that measures the relative strength of each of an indi- subject with a program that administered a short
Fig.5.Distributionprofile(Task1).

D.J.Hall,R.A.Davis/DecisionSupportSystems43(2007)1588–1604 1597
Fig.6.Distributionprofile(Task2).
demographic survey, the value-based perspective study 6. Results
(i.e.,theAVLStudyofValueswhichisadministeredin
two sections), and two funds disbursement tasks. The Preliminary data analysis was performed to ensure
perspective development system (i.e., the treatment dataintegrityandtomakeadjustmentsasnecessaryfor
condition) was different from the control system in removing outliers and establishing covariates. Because
only one aspect. It contained an alternative perspective ofthesize ofthesample(n=388),evennessofthedis-
consideration component designed to encourage the tribution(n =193;n =195),andlackofmissingdata,no
t c
subject to consider all sides of a given problem. The violation of assumptions was expected nor found; no
treatment was activated following the first funds impact of covariates or outliers was detected. This pre-
distribution task; the control group received an inter- liminaryanalysisconfirmedthatstudyrequirementsand
vening break between the two tasks that consisted of a that assumptions critical to statistical analysis were not
page from the “Foundation” thanking them for their violated.
“goodwork”inthefirstfundingtaskandaskingthatthey Theprimarymethodofanalysisusedinthisstudyis
continuetheirjobas“trustee”throughonemoreroundof profile analysis, a multivariate form of repeated mea-
funding. sures ANOVA. The intent is to discern patterns of re-
Tasks 1 and 2 were similarin style (six programs to sponses over groups, rather than look at the individual
which to distribute $500,000, each aligned to one of measures.Thistypeofanalysisiscommoninthesocial
Spranger'svalues),buttheprogramsoutlinedinTask2 sciences where groups of related characteristics are of
weredistinctlydifferentfromthoseinTask1.Thus,the interest(e.g.,[36,43]),andisparticularlyusefulinsitu-
second task was a similar decision domain, as opposed ations where the measures have acomplexrelationship
to a re-examination of a previous decision (because suchasthedataanalyzedhere.
of space limitations, specific funding request projects Becauseallofthesubjectsarefromthesamegeneral
and their corresponding values are available from the populationandwererandomlyassignedtothecontrolor
authors).Theresultsofthesecondfundsdistributiontask treatment group, no difference in their profiles was ex-
provideevidenceofwhetherthemanipulationsucceeded pected for the administration of the AVL or the first
in changing the subject's response to funding requests. executionofthefundsdistributiontask.However,these
Results from the AVL and the funds tasks were used assumptions required testing before hypothesis testing
tobuildprofilesforanalysis.Theseprofilesprovidethe began.Asexpected,nosignificantdifferencesinprofiles
basis for comparison between treatment and control werefoundfortheAVL(F=0.57,p=0.72,η2= 0.007).
p
groupresponses. Thisindicatesthecontrolandtreatmentgroupsexhibited
Table2
Significancelevelwhencomparingtreatmentandcontrolgroupmeandifferencesforthefirstandsecondfundsdistributions
Aesthetic Economic Social Religious Political Theoretical
Task1 p=0.85 0.98 0.81 0.47 0.13 0.33
Task2 pb0.05 ⁎ 0.08 0.89 b0.01 ⁎ 0.68 b0.01 ⁎
⁎ Significantatα=0.05.

1598 D.J.Hall,R.A.Davis/DecisionSupportSystems43(2007)1588–1604
Table3
Correlationbetweenthevalueprofileandthedistributionprofile(Task2)foreachgroup[correlation(p-value)]
Aesthetic Economic Social Religious Political Theoretical
Pre-treatment(allcorrelationssignificant)
Control 0.28(b0.0001) 0.25(0.0003) 0.15(0.0404) 0.30(b0.0001) 0.33(b0.0001) 0.15(0.0331)
Treatment 0.22(0.0019) 0.20(0.0067) 0.14(0.0481) 0.33(b0.0001) 0.35(b0.0001) 0.18(0.0113)
Post-treatment
Control 0.25(0.0005) 0.31(b0.0001) 0.18(0.0099) 0.58(b0.0001) 0.16(0.0298) 0.25(0.0005)
Treatment 0.20(0.0045) −0.01(0.8583) ⁎⁎ 0(0.9954) ⁎⁎ 0.38(b0.0001) 0.18(0.0130) 0.10(0.1822) ⁎⁎
⁎⁎
Notsignificant.
similarvalueprofiles.Thesesameresultswereevidentin Thesecondpreviouslystatedhypothesisinvestigates
theprofilesofthefirstfundsdistributiontask(F=0.73, whetheranindividualwillbeabletodeviatefromhisor
p=0.60,η2=0.009),indicatingthatbothgroupsallocat- herstatedvalueprofile;eachgroup'sstatedvalueprofile
p
ed funds similarly between each program. Further, the was compared to their second funds distribution task
means of the responses differed significantly over each profile.Forpurposesofthisresearch,asubjectexhibits
ofthesixprogramsindicatingthegroupshadpreferred perspective development if their post-treatment dis-
dimensions. Fig. 4 clearly shows that the profiles are tribution profile (i.e., the results of Task 2) and their
almostindistinguishableforvalueresponses,andFig.5 value profile (i.e., as determined by the AVL) are dif-
shows the same for the first funds distribution task. ferent. Statistically this could be evidenced by a lack
Theseresultsindicatethatanypost-treatmentdifferences of correlation between the professed importance of a
between the groups can reasonably be attributed to the valueandtheamountoffundsgiventoacorresponding
treatment. program.
As expected, the control group's allocation offunds
7. Hypothesis analysis inthesecondfundsdistributiontaskisconsistentwithits
response to the values study, statistically supported by
Aspreviouslystated,hypothesis1examineswhether Pearson Correlations shown in Table3 (correlations all
subjects in the treatment group allocated funds differ- significant atp≤0.05).The pattern ofthevalue profile
entlyinthesecondfundsdistributiontaskascomparedto generally matched the pattern of the funds distribution
the first, indicating they placed different emphases on profileforthesecondtask.Notethatwearenotfocusing
eachvalue-basedperspectiveafterthetreatment.Asex- ontherelativedifferencebetweenfundsdistributionfor
pected,analysisresultsshowevidencetorejectsimilarity any one program, but rather the pattern of consistent
between groups in thesecond task indicating that there correlation. For instance, the religious value received
are significant differences in the way the two groups highresponses;thereligiousprogramreceivedthemost
distributed funds (F=5.1, pb0.01, η2=0.063). This funding. The theoretical value received low responses;
p
supports our hypothesis that behavior on a similar task correspondingly, the theoretically based program re-
willdifferfollowingexposuretoaPDcomponent.Fig.6 ceivedlowfunding(seeFig.6).Thispatternisconsistent
shows the profiles for each group for the second funds acrossthetask.
distributiontask. Suchwasnotthecasewiththetreatmentgroup,how-
Therewerenosignificantdifferencesintheamountof ever. Correlation analysis indicates that the treatment
fundsdistributedtoeachprograminTask1betweenthe groupchangedtheirscoresontheeconomic,social,and
twogroups,aswouldbeexpectedbetweengroupswith theoretical dimensions, which suggests the treatment
similarprofiles.However,whilethedistributionprofiles group exhibited a perspective development effect. For
ofthegroupsdifferedsignificantlyinTask2,resultsof instance,althoughtheaestheticvaluewasthefifthrank-
pairwise comparisons, adjusted for multiple compari- ed value in the sample, it received the third highest
sons, indicate that not all dimensions differed equally proportionoffunding.Itreceivedmore,infact,thanthe
(seeTable2).Specifically,thegroupsdistributedsimilar economic program although the economic value was
amountsoffundstothepoliticalandsocialprograms,a ranked considerably higher. The subjects who received
different amount to the economic program, and signif- the treatment exhibited an applied value profile that is
icantlydifferentamountstotheaesthetic,theoretical,and differentfromtheirstatedvalueprofile,thussupporting
religiousprograms. thesecondhypothesisthatthetreatmentconditionwould

D.J.Hall,R.A.Davis/DecisionSupportSystems43(2007)1588–1604 1599
result in a behavior pattern (applied value profile) that Supportingadecision-maker'sconsiderationofmul-
differedfromtheirstatedvalues. tiple perspectivescan, atleast temporarily,alterthede-
cision-maker'sappliedvalueprofileduringthatdecision
8. Discussion task so that a wider range of values are given due con-
sideration. Broadened perspective bases have practical
This study has examined whether a component benefitstoanorganization.Forinstance,theothereffects
designed to support an individual's use of multiple mentionedabove(innovation,creativity,andadaptabili-
perspectives during a decision-making task can be ty)becomecrucialindecisiondomainsofcomplexprob-
conceptually developed and empirically tested. Specif- lems,particularlysociallyorientedones.Anorganization
ically, the results are evidence of the consideration of canutilizesupportsystemsdesignedtobroadenperspec-
multiplevalue-basedperspectivesandofreduced value tives,especiallyvalue-basedperspectives,tocreate,ac-
bias. One might argue that the change in thetreatment cumulate, and manage knowledge critical to its core
subjects' behaviors can be explained by increased competencies.
creativity or innovativeness or just simple alignment Asanindividual'sperspectivebaseexpands,sodoes
with conscious thoughts of one's values. Alternatively, thatindividual'sabilitytoseeabiggerpicture. Whena
perhapsthetreatmentsubjectsadaptedtheirbehaviorin groupofindividualsarebroughttogetherinthisway,the
some sense to produce the behavior they believed was problemspacedevelopedbythatgroupbecomesbigger,
desiredbytheresearcher.Wenotethatonlythetreatment allowingforawiderrangeofalternativestobegenerated
group,thegroupencouragedtoconsiderotherperspec- andmoreinformedchoicestobemade[29,33,61].Con-
tives,behavedinthisway.Wenotedearlierthebenefits sideration of multiple perspectives also allows an indi-
ofconsideringadecisiondomainfrom awideperspec- vidualtoperceiveandprocessinformationthatmaynot
tive: increased creativity, innovation, and adaptability havebeenconsideredusefulunderadifferentlens,which
[11,32]. Thus, even if the treatment group's behaviors isanantecedenttoorganizationallearning.Anincreased
canbedescribedascreative,innovative,oradaptive,we amountofinformationusefulinaparticulardomainhas
believe the controlled nature of the laboratory experi- beenshowntoincreasedecisionquality[57].Thevalue-
mentsupportsourconclusionthatperspectivedevelop- basedcomponenttestedinthisresearchencouragedin-
mentledtothisbehaviorbecausethecontrolgroupdid dividualstoconsiderandusemultipleperspectivesduring
not behave in the same way. Creativity, innovation, a decision task. When information based on these per-
adaptability,andsofortharedifferenteffects. spectivesisincorporatedintoorganizationalmemory,it
There is clear precedent for our conclusion on this becomesavailableforotherdecisiondomains.
point.ParkerandAxtell[49]citeresearchfromthestudy Itisinterestingtonotewhichvalue-baseddimensions
of human development that it is the ability to take the weremediated.Itshouldcomeaslittlesurprisethatthe
perspective of others that leads to greater empathy [4], individualscouldnotbepersuadedtodeviatefromfund-
higherlevelsofcognitivecomplexity[26],moraldevel- ingthereligiousprogramasthisvaluewasthestrongest
opment [35], and managerial effectiveness [64]. For among the subjects. The characteristics of the religious
example,for empathy tooccur,anindividualmustfirst value include faith, acceptance, and a respect for the
recognizethatsomethingishappeningtosomeoneelse rights of people [19]. Individuals with a high religious
andhavesomeunderstandingofhowtheotherpersonis value profile tend to be empathetic, concerned with
feeling. In all of these cases, the driver of the behavior socialwelfare,andidealistic;suchfaith-based,idealistic
changeisconsiderationofotherperspectives. values are less likely to respond to manipulation [3].
The primary finding of this research is that an indi- Theoretical programs may have had appeal given the
vidual's decision-making behavior can be changed in student population of the study; aesthetic support may
value-basedsituations.Previousresearchhassuggested havecomefromafeelingofcommunitythatiscommon
that the individual differences caused in part by value oncampuses.
profilesmaybetoocomplextobemanagedeffectivelyin However,theabilitytomanipulatetheeconomic,the-
systemdesign[30],butmustbeacknowledgedasante- oretical, and social value-based perspectives is a valu-
cedentsfortheoutcomeoftechnologicalendeavorssuch able finding. Numerous studies have indicated that the
as MIS acceptance and success [13,65]. This research, economicandtheoreticaldimensionsarethestrongestof
however, suggests that it is possible, through a system the dimensions in individuals representing managerial
component such as that developed here, to change the positions (e.g., [1,39]). Mitigating the effect of these
behavior of decision-makers in a specific decision values should allow organizations to move away from
domain. thetechnicalperspectiveofdecision-makingandtoward

1600 D.J.Hall,R.A.Davis/DecisionSupportSystems43(2007)1588–1604
theorganizationalandpersonalperspectivesassuggest- specifically strives to mediate this unifocus by first ac-
edbyMitroffandLinstone[46]. knowledgingthatallmembersofthegrouphaveclosely
Indeed, a decision support environment that inte- held beliefs, and encouraging communication between
grates the multiple perspective support as we have de- the members such that the beliefs and their related as-
scribed and tested here moves organizations toward sumptions are surfaced and discussed. This moves the
what Mitroff and Linstone [46] describe as the “third organizationtowardvalue-attunedresponsiveness—the
way of knowing”, that is, multiple realities. They state, understanding that complex (primarily social) decision
“…the assumption is that on problems of any signifi- contextssuchaspolicyformulationareinseparablefrom
cance, the analyst, decision-maker, or policy-maker individualvalues[60].
needs to explicitly see a range of different representa- Formulating and ultimately solving ill-structured
tions of the problem so that he or she can participate problems may also benefit from a model such as ours.
actively in the problem solving process…” (p. 63, their Organizations often rely on their members to make
emphasis).Thehopethattheyputforthisthatexposure decisions ina changingandunpredictable environment
to a range of perspectives (i.e., representations) will thatproducesthesetypesofproblems.Intuitivedecision-
allow the decision-maker to produce a new, stronger making is routinely used in these situations where a
perspective that synthesizes the ones reviewed. The managerinterpretstheenvironmentandreactstoa“gut
social value-based perspective may also enable these feeling.”Further,researchshowsthatinformationthatis
organizations to be more cognizant of their social re- used in these situations is socially constructed [40].
sponsibilities and the impact of their actions on their Intuitive action enables an individual to come to un-
communities. derstandasituationwithoutexplicitanalysis[31].Effec-
tiveintuitionrequiresnotonlytheindividual'sabilityto
9. Implications judge the problem athand, butalso theenvironment in
which the problem is situated. Although these mental
TheVBDMmodeldiscussedaboveprovidesorgani- models are rarely, if ever, complete, they guide subse-
zations with the means to surface, consider, and en- quentdecision-makingbehavior[47].Asmanagersrou-
couragemultipleperspectivesbasedonvalues.Because tinelyengageinactiveinterpretationduringtheVBDM
anindividual'svaluesprovidethefoundationforhisor model process, their mental models expand, perhaps
herbeliefs,perspectives,andultimatelyhisorherdeci- moving the models toward a more complete state, and
sions, investigation into this area is important for an thus eliminating some elementof uncertainty about the
understandingofdecision-makingbehaviorinorganiza- judgment.
tionsaswellasthecomplementaryareaoforganizational
learning;thereareimplicationsforpracticeandtheory. 9.2. Theoretical implications
9.1. Practical implications On a theoretical level, the VBDM model, with its
focus on a small set of core personal values extends
ApracticalimplicationoftheVBDMmodelisthatit individualvalueusagewithintheorganization.Swanson
providesthebasisforengaginganorganizationinactive [60] encourages research to develop a theory of values
considerationofvalues.Inanerawhenanorganization's thatmayprovidetheattunementprocesswithsomelevel
social responsibility is more prominent, such a consid- of explanatory power, and that may help to focus un-
erationmaynotonlybeadvisable,butmaybeunavoid- derstanding of individual values and their impact on
ableincertainareas,suchaspolicyformulationandother individual(andparticularlyexecutive)behavior.Bypro-
ideologicallybasedissues.Wade-Benzonietal.[62]dis- vidingadefinedsetofvaluesthatmaybemeasuredby
cussbarrierstoideologicallybasednegotiationswherein establishedinstruments(e.g.,theStudyofValues[1]),a
they define those contexts to be societal issues. These theory of individual values may be constructed and
issues may be difficult to resolve because individual tested.
valueslimithowanindividualinterpretstheinformation, Using a model such as the VBDM model may not
especiallywhenaparticularissueiscloselyrelatedtoa only enhance an organization's understanding of the
value held with deep conviction. Research shows that, values that its members hold, but it may also help the
when an individual is presented with a problem that individuals better understand themselves. Self-percep-
evokesstrongsentiment(eitherpositiveornegative),he tion theory indicates that individuals may not be fully
orsheismorelikelytofocusnarrowlythantoembrace aware of what their value profile is or even that one
otherinformationorideas(e.g.,[62]).TheVBDMmodel exists. Instead, individuals, if aware of values, may

D.J.Hall,R.A.Davis/DecisionSupportSystems43(2007)1588–1604 1601
deduce what those values are based on their actions in usageofasystembuiltonitsfoundationisnotlimitedto
different situations just as an observer may deduce an that. A design as flexible as the VBDM model can be
individual's values based on that person's actions [5]. used for decision-support, learning support, or as a
TheVBDMmodelallowsanorganizationtodisseminate component of a knowledge management system. En-
concreteinformationtoitsmembersregardingthevalue hancedperspectivedevelopment willnaturallyincrease
profile,thusallowingindividualstobecomeawareofthe an individual's (or organization's) mental model and
values they hold. In turn, this awareness of one's own therefore affect decision-making and other information
values will enhance understanding of another's values, intensive processes such as knowledge generation. Re-
whichshouldpromotefewervalue-basedconflicts. cent research in negotiation support [59] indicates that
Lastly, the VBDM model conceptualized here may synthesizing decision-makers' mental models not only
providethebasisfortheindividualrepresentationscheme increases the level of consensus with the group, but
necessary for successful interpretive organizational improvesthesocialclimateinwhichthegroupsoperate.
learning [28]. First, the use of the value set chosen Such cohesiveness can enhance the decision-making
allows organizations (or researchers) to focus on and process by reducing conflict, which is a goal of the
perhaps test two foundations of interpretive organiza- VBDM model. All decision-making, information gath-
tionallearning(IOL).Thefirstisanunderstandingofthe ering,andknowledgegenerationscenariosrequiresome
contextual interpretation of a given individual, and the negotiationtoreducetheconflictinherentinacceptable
second is the ability to understand potential alignment informationandsolutions.
and/orinteractionofthoseinterpretations.Byacknowl- To achieve the goal of multiple perspectives, orga-
edging a discrete set of values, and understanding how nizations should encourage individuals to think more
alliances or conflict may arise within that set, an broadlyaboutproblems,andtoconsidertheviewpoints
organization should be able to provide the surfacing of of others. When an individual strongly favors one or
conflict necessary to IOL. Hine et al. [28] also suggest more of the six value-based perspectives, encouraging
requirements for an individual representation scheme, this growth may be difficult. Recent research [22–24]
suchasflexibility,scoperestriction,andstandardization indicates that systems designed to facilitate the devel-
of terminology such that effective communication may opment of multiple perspectives may be beneficial in
occur. Using values to represent this scheme provides encouragingindividualstoovercometheirinnatemental
those requirements and contributes a way to measure modelsduringspecificproblem-solvingcontexts.Itmay
equivocality. A given value profile is likely to result in benecessarytorely onspecially developedtechnology
multipleinterpretationsdependingonthecomplexityof to aid this process, particularly to provide the ability
the context. Further, Hine et al. [28] suggest that an to update the mental models of organizational mem-
organization must strive to understand belief variety, bers and ultimately the collective mental model of an
whichisthenumberofbeliefsinagiveninterpretation. organization.
Byusingadiscretevaluesetpresentedasavalueprofile Recent advances in technology may enable organi-
unique to an individual, the VBDM model defines not zations to facilitate the process of populating organiza-
onlybeliefvarietybutalsothecharacteristicsassociated tionalmemorywithmultipleperspectives,thusenabling
witheachbelief. organizational members to refer to those perspectives
and the knowledge produced as needed. This will ef-
9.3. Research implications fectively update and expand both individual and
collectivementalmodels.Courtney[12]suggestsseveral
TheVBDMmodeldiscussedherebegetsavenuesfor Web-basedtechnologicalavenueswherebythismaybe
futureresearch.Furthertestingoftheapplicabilityofthe possible—forinstance,chats,email,applets,andknow-
values in the workplace is possible; testing the devel- ledgerepositories.AsystembasedontheVBDMmodel
opment and synthesis processes in a group setting is may incorporate any (or many) of these technologies.
another possibility. Further refining of the PD compo- Agent technology is also a promising avenue for
nentanddevelopmentoftheperspectivesynthesiscom- implementationofcomplexsystems[24,25].
ponentshouldalsobeconsidered. Another avenue for research is further development
It is possible that the VBDM model may be a po- of the behavioral aspects of the system. Do individuals
tential implementation of an interpretive organizational usingasystemsuchastheVBDMmodelgeneratemore
learning system (one such system is that of Hine and alternativesolutionsthanindividualswithoutsuchsup-
Goul[29]).TheVBDMmodelhasbeenconceptualized port? Can such a system, over time, mediate potential
in the image of a decision-support system, although bias effects of strongly held values of an individual?

1602 D.J.Hall,R.A.Davis/DecisionSupportSystems43(2007)1588–1604
Doesuseofthesystempromotefaster,moreefficient,or [5] D.J. Bem, Self-perception: an alternative interpretation of
better decisions? Is there enough variety of value cognitivedissonancephenomena,PsychologicalReview74(2)
(1967)183–200.
profilesinagivengroupofdecision-makerstoachieve
[6] I.Benbasat,L.-H.Lim,Theeffectsofgroup,task,content,and
theobjectiveof synthesizing multiple perspectives?
technologyvariablesontheusefulnessofgroupsupportsystems:
ameta-analysisofexperimentalstudies,SmallGroupResearch
10. Conclusion 24(4)(1993)430–462.
[7] K.L.Betttenhausen,K.J.Murnighan,Theemergenceofnormsin
competitive decision making groups, Administrative Science
As organizations continue to strive for sustainable
Quarterly30(1985)350–372.
gains in productivity and excellence, the importance of
[8] R.J.BolandJr.,R.V.Tenkasi,Perspectivemakingandperspec-
effective decision-making and organizational learning tivetakingincommunitiesofknowledge,OrganizationScience6
continues to increase. The environment faced by orga- (4)(1995)350–372.
nizationstodayisoftencomplexandverydynamic.Itis [9] R.H.Bonczek,C.W.Holsapple,A.B.Whinston,Foundationsof
DecisionSupportSystems,AcademicPress,NewYork,1981.
critical thatorganizationsconsiderthecontribution that
[10] C.W. Churchman, The Design of Inquiring Systems: Basic
multiple perspectives make to decision-making and
ConceptsofSystemsandOrganizations,BasicBooks,Inc.,New
learning. In a particular decision context such as a York,NY,1971.
novelsituation,crisis,orcontextsthatevokeemotion,a [11] J.D.Couger,L.F.Higgins,S.C.McIntyre,(Un)Structuredcrea-
decision-maker with a set of personal values on which tivityininformationsystemsorganizations,MISQuarterly17(4)
(1993)375–397.
theirperspectiveisbasedmaynotbeabletoidentifyall
[12] J.F.Courtney,Decisionmakingandknowledgemanagementin
sidesoftheissueunderconsideration.Yet,beingableto
inquiring organizations: a new decision-making paradigm for
view the decision environment from multiple perspec- DSS, Decision Support Systems Special Issue on Knowledge
tives enhances the decision-maker's ability to make Management31(1)(2001)17–38.
better-informed choices. The value-based decision- [13] F.D.Davis,Perceivedusefulness,perceivedeaseofuse,anduser
acceptanceofinformationtechnology,MISQuarterly13(1989)
making model described in this paper provides a
318–340.
framework that organizations and researchers can use
[14] G.DeSanctis,M.S.Poole,M.Limayem,D.Luitjens,"TheGDSS
to better understand and facilitate the use of multiple Research Project: Experimental Task Materials," MISRC-WP-
perspectives in decision-making and organizational 92-07, Management Information Systems Research Center,
learning. Curtis L. Carlson School of Management, University of
Minnesota(1992).
ThefoundationsoftheVBDMmodelareCourtney's
[15] A.J. DiBella, E.C. Nevis, How Organizations Learn: An Inte-
[12]decision-makingandknowledgemanagementpara-
grated Strategy for Building Learning Capability, Jossey-Bass
digm and the conflict/consensus process of interpretive Inc.,SanFrancisco,1998.
organizationallearning[28,29].TheCourtneyparadigm [16] W.C.Frederick,Anchoringvaluesinnature:towardatheoryof
has been enhanced by the addition of six value-based businessvalues,BusinessEthicsQuarterly2(1)(1992)283–302.
[17] D.Giola,P.P.Poole,Scriptsinorganizationalbehavior,Academy
perspectiveswhichformthefoundationoftheindividual
ofManagementReview9(1984)449–459.
representation scheme of interpretive organizational
[18] W.D.Guth,R.Tagiuri,Personalvaluesandcorporatestrategy,
learning. Understanding these values is integral to un- HarvardBusinessReview43(5)(1965)123–132.
derstanding value-based decision behavior. Effective [19] B.Hall,O.Harari,B.Ledig,M.Tondow,ManualfortheHall-
decision-making and learning require consideration of TonnaInventoryofValues,PaulistPress,NewJersey,1986.
multiple perspectives; this model will enhance the un- [20] D.J.Hall,TestingPerformanceandPerspectiveinanIntegrated
KnowledgeManagementSystem,CollegeStation,2002.
derstanding of individual values and their place in or-
[21] D.J.Hall,D.Paradice,Doyoudoasyouvalue?Investigating
ganizationallearninganddecision-making.
value-baseddecisionbiasandmediation,Communicationsofthe
ACM(inpress).
[22] D.J. Hall, D.B. Paradice, Philosophical foundations for a
References learning-oriented knowledge management system for decision
support,DecisionSupportSystems39(3)(2005)445–461.
[1] G.W. Allport, P.E. Vernon, C. Lindzey, A Study of Values, [23] D.J. Hall, D.B. Paradice, J.F. Courtney, Building a theoretical
Riverside,Chicago,IL,1970. foundation for a learning-oriented knowledge management
[2] C. Argyris, D.A. Schön, Organizational Learning II, Addison- system,Journalof InformationTechnologyTheoryand Appli-
WesleyPublishingCompany,Reading,MA,1996. cation(JITTA)5(2)(2003)63–89.
[3] J.Barnett,K.Bass,G.Brown,Religiosity,ethicalideology,and [24] D.J.Hall,Y.Guo,R.A.Davis,C.Cegielski,Extendingunbounded
intentions to report a peer's wrongdoing, Journal of Business systemsthinkingwithagent-orientedmodeling:conceptualizinga
Ethics15(November1996)1161–1174. multiple-perspective decision-making system, Decision Support
[4] J.M. Bartunek, J.R. Gordon, R.P. Weathersby, Developing Systems41(1)(2005)279–295.
‘complicated’ understanding in administrators, Academy of [25] D.J. Hall, Y. Guo, R.A. Davis, C. Cegielski, Technological
ManagementReview8(2)(1983)273–284. supportforalearning-orientedknowledgemanagementsystem,

D.J.Hall,R.A.Davis/DecisionSupportSystems43(2007)1588–1604 1603
Proceedings of the Americas Conference on Information nal of Management Information Systems 15 (2) (1998)
Systems,Omaha,NE,2005. 173–197.
[26] O.J.Harvey,D.E.Hunt,H.M.Shroder,ConceptualSystemsand [46] I.I.Mitroff,H.A.Linstone,TheUnboundedMind:Breakingthe
PersonalityOrganization,Wiley,NewYork,NY,1961. Chains of Traditional Business Thinking, Oxford University
[27] K.M. Hilmer, A.R. Dennis, Stimulating thinking: cultivating Press,NewYork,1993.
betterdecisionswithgroupwarethroughcategorization,Journal [47] D.A.Norman,Usercenteredsystemdesign,in:D.A.Norman,S.
ofManagementInformationSystems17(3)(2001)93–114. Draper (Eds.), Cognitive Engineering, Lawrence Erlbaum
[28] M.J.Hine,J.B.Gasen,M.Goul,Emergingissuesininterpretive Associates,Hillsdale,NJ,1986,pp.31–61.
organizational learning, The DATA BASE for Advances in [48] C.A. O'Reilly III, J.A. Chatman, D.F. Caldwell, People and
InformationSystems27(3)(1996)49–62. organizationalculture:aprofilecomparisonapproachtoasses-
[29] M.Hine,M.Goul,Thedesign,development,andvalidationofa sing person-organization fit, Academy of Management 34 (3)
knowledge-basedorganizationallearningsupportsystem,Jour- (1991)487–516.
nalofManagementInformationSystems15(2)(1998)119–152. [49] S.K.Parker,C.M.Axtell,Seeinganotherviewpoint:antecedents
[30] G.Huber,CognitivestyleasabasisforMISdesign:muchado and outcomes of employee perspective taking, Academy of
aboutnothing?ManagementScience29(5)(1983)567–597. ManagementJournal44(6)(2001)1085–1100.
[31] T.S. Isaack, Intuition: an ignored dimension of management, [50] A. Pinsonneault, K. Kraemer, The impact of technological
AcademyofManagementReview3(4)(1978)917–921. supportongroups:anassessmentofempiricalresearch,Decision
[32] R.Keeney,Value-FocusedThinking,HarvardUniversityPress,
SupportSystems5(2)(1989)197–216.
Cambridge,MA,1992. [51] W.F. Pounds, The process of problem finding, Industrial
[33] R. Keeney, Foundations for making smart decisions, IIE
ManagementReview11(1969)1–19.
Solutions31(5)(1999)24–30. [52] E.H. Schein, Organizational Culture and Leadership, Jossey
[34] D.E. Kiranne, Managing values: a systematic approach to Bass,SanFrancisco,CA,1992.
business ethics, Training and Development Journal November [53] H.A.Simon,Thestructureofill-structuredproblems,Artificial
(1990)53–60. Intelligence4(1973)181–201.
[35] L.Kohlberg,Stageandsequence:thecognitivedevelopmental [54] G.F. Smith, Defining managerial problems: a framework for
approach to socialization, in: D.A. Goslin (Ed.), Handbook of prescriptive theorizing, Management Science 35 (8) (1989)
SocializationTheoryandResearch,AcademicPress,SanDiego,
963–981.
CA,1969,pp.347–480. [55] E.Soule,Managerialmoralstrategies—insearchofafewgood
[36] T.R. Konold, J.J. Glutting, P.A. McDermott, J.C. Kush, M.M. principles, Academy of Management Review 27 (1) (2002)
Watkins,Structureanddiagnosticbenefitsofanormativesubtest 114–124.
taxonomydevelopedfromtheWISC-IIIstandardizationsample, [56] E. Spranger, Types of men; the Psychology and Ethics of
JournalofSchoolPsychology37(1999)29–48. Personality,JohnsonReprints,NewYork,NY,1928/1966.
[37] R.E.Kopelman,J.L.Rovenpor,M.Guan,Thestudyofvalues: [57] G.Stasser,D.Stewart,Discoveryofhiddenprofilesbydecision-
constructionofthefourthedition,JournalofVocationalBehavior making groups: solving a problem versus making a judgment,
62(2)(2003)203–220. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 63 (1) (1992)
[38] R.M.Krauss,S.R.Fussell,Perspectivetakingincommunication: 426–434.
representations of others' knowledge in reference, Social [58] E.A.Stohr,B.R.Konsynski,InformationSystemsandDecision
Cognition9(1)(1991)2–24. Processes:ChartingNewDirectionsforDSSResearch:AMulti-
[39] K. Kumar, M. Thibodeaux, Differences in values systems of Disciplinary Approach, IEEE Computer Society Press, Los
Anglo-AmericanandFarEasternstudents:effectsofAmerican Alamitos,CA,1992.
business education, Journal of Business Ethics 17 (1998) [59] R.I. Swaab, T. Postmes, P. Neijens, M.H. Kiers, A.C.M.
253–262. Dumay, Multiparty negotiation support: the role of visualiza-
[40] F.-Y. Kuo, Managerial intuition and the development of ex- tion's influence on the development of shared mental models,
ecutivesupportsystems,DecisionSupportSystems24(2)(1998) Journal of Management Information Systems 19 (1) (2002)
89–103. 129–150.
[41] D.Lubinski,D.Schmidt,C.PerssonBenbow,A20-yearstability [60] D.L. Swanson, Toward an integrative theory of business and
analysisofthestudyofvaluesforintellectuallygiftedindividuals society: a research strategy for corporate social performance,
fromadolescencetoadulthood,JournalofAppliedPsychology AcademyofManagementReview24(3)(1999)506–521.
81(4)(1996)443–451. [61] R.Vahidov,R.Elrod,Incorporatingcritiqueandargumentation
[42] R.O.Mason,I.Mitroff,Aprogramforresearchonmanagement inDSS,DecisionSupportSystems26(3)(1999)249–258.
information systems, Management Science 19 (5) (1973) [62] K.A. Wade-Benzoni, A.J. Hoffman, L.L. Thompson, D.A.
475–487. Moore,J.J.Gillespie,M.H.Bazerman,Barrierstoresolutionin
[43] P.A. McDermott, J.W. Fantuzzo, J.J. Glutting, M.W. Watkins, ideologicallybasednegotiations:theroleofvaluesandinstitu-
A.R.Baggaley,Illustrationsofmeaningintheipsativeassessment tions,AcademyofManagementReview27(1)(2002)41–57.
of children's ability, Journal of Special Education 25 (1992) [63] R.T. Watson, G. DeSanctis, M.S. Poole, Using a GDSS to
504–526. facilitate group consensus: some intended and unintended
[44] B.M.Meglino,E.C.Ravlin,Individualvaluesinorganizations: consequences,MISQuarterly12(3)(1988)463–480.
concepts, Controversies and Research, Management 24 (3) [64] K.E. Weick, The Social Psychology of Organizing, Random
(1998)351–389. House,NewYork,1979.
[45] B.E.Mennecke,J.Valacich,Informationiswhatyoumakeofit: [65] R.W.Zmud,IndividualdifferencesandMISsuccess:areviewof
the influence of group history and computer support on infor- the empirical literature, Management Science 25 (10) (1979)
mationsharing,decisionquality,andmemberperceptions,Jour- 966–979.

1604 D.J.Hall,R.A.Davis/DecisionSupportSystems43(2007)1588–1604
DianneJ.HallisanAssistant RobertA.DavisisanAssoci-
Professor of Management In- ateProfessorintheComputer
formation Systems at Auburn Information Systems and
University. She received her Quantitative Methods Depart-
doctorateatTexasA&MUni- mentoftheMcCoyCollegeof
versity where she also taught Business Administration at
forseveralyears.Shehasalso Texas State University-San
worked as a consultant. Her Marcos. He earned his MBA
work has appeared in both and Ph.D. degrees from the
academicandpractitionerjour- University of South Carolina.
nals such as Communications Heistheco-authorofOpera-
oftheACM,DecisionSupport tions Management: Concepts
Systems, Journal of Financial in Manufacturing and Ser-
Services Marketing, OR In- vices.Hehas publishedmany
sight,theInternationalJournal articlesdealingwiththeeffec-
of Knowledge Management, tive and efficient utilization of resources for operations and supply
Journal of Information Technology Theory and Application, and chainmanagement.His articleshaveappearedinacademicjournals
KnowledgeandInnovationandinseveralbooks.Hercurrentresearch suchasManagementScience,DecisionSupportSystems,Engineering
interestsincludeapplicationsofinformationtechnologiesinsupportof Costs and Production Economics, Journal of Marketing, National
knowledge management as well as multiple-perspective and value- Productivity Review, International Journal of Production Research,
baseddecision-making. CompetitivenessReview,JournalofBusinessResearch,andProduc-
tion and Inventory Management Journal. He has served as Co-
Principal Investigator on several research projects with industrial
clientsdealingoperationsandsupplychainissues.

