Decision Support Systems 43 (2007) 1588 – 1604
www.elsevier.com/locate/dss

Engaging multiple perspectives: A value-based
decision-making model
Dianne J. Hall a,⁎, Robert A. Davis b,1
b

a
Department of Management, Auburn University, 401 Lowder Business Building, Auburn, AL 36849-5241, United States
Department of Computer Information Systems, Texas State University-San Marcos, San Marcos, TX 78666-4616, United States

Available online 24 April 2006

Abstract
In some decision contexts, such as a crisis or when confronted by a new or novel set of circumstances, people may be forced to
make decisions with limited information or time available for analysis. In such contexts, the set of alternative solutions developed may
be greatly affected by the personal values and the perspective those values precipitate. Being able to view the decision environment
from multiple perspectives enhances the decision-maker's ability to make better-informed choices. This article introduces the valuebased decision-making model that suggests that multiple perspectives may be achieved by considering a foundation of individual
values. Empirical testing indicates that this model provides a viable framework that decision-makers and researchers can use to better
understand and facilitate multiple perspectives in decision-making.
© 2006 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Keywords: Decision support; Multiple perspective decision-making; Individual values

1. Introduction
Many authors suggest that a key component to effective problem formulation and solution is to expand
the problem set with as many facts and assumptions as is
reasonable (e.g., [51,53]). Discrepancies, however, are
likely to occur in the interpretation of those facts, particularly in a complex domain where stakeholders may
not come from similar backgrounds. Identification of
those discrepancies is critical to developing an interpretation that is shared among the decision-makers. Hine
et al. [28,29] schematically demonstrate the process of
arriving at a shared interpretation, which then benefits
⁎ Corresponding author. Tel.: +1 334 844 6443.
E-mail addresses: dhall@auburn.edu (D.J. Hall),
rd23@txstate.edu (R.A. Davis).
1
Tel.: +1 512 245 8676.
0167-9236/$ - see front matter © 2006 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.dss.2006.03.004

organizational decision-making. They suggest that a representation scheme that allows interpretations to be
compared should be developed. This scheme must be
able to standardize the perspectives evident in individual interpretations such that a common understanding of
the differences (our emphasis) may happen. From this
common understanding, conflict may be measured,
addressed, and reduced. The authors suggest that an individual's beliefs form the building block of interpretations and therefore may be a potential measure for
operationalizing and measuring equivocality.
Courtney [12] also demonstrates a process of reaching a shared interpretation (in his term, shared mental
model) and considers individual beliefs as a basis of
perspective in his paradigm for knowledge management,
creation, and decision-making. Hine et al.'s [28,29] approach is to recognize the potential for differing interpretations and to find ways to mediate and synthesize those

D.J. Hall, R.A. Davis / Decision Support Systems 43 (2007) 1588–1604

differences, while Courtney [12] actively encourages a
number of perspectives in the decision context prior to
synthesis. He suggests expanding Mason and Mitroff's
[42] Technical-Organizational-Personal model by adding aesthetic and ethical perspectives such that managers, stakeholders, system designers, and others have a
foundation on which to search for and promote differences.
While these perspectives are relatively well-defined
[10,12,42] and may begin the process of developing a
representation scheme such as that called for by Hine et
al. [28,29], our research goes a step further. In this study,
we propose that all individuals develop perspectives
based on their individual values and that a representation
scheme for individual interpretation should be based on
individual values as defined by Spranger [56]. Our research motivation is based on the need to understand
decision-making behavior, the belief that individual
values impact that behavior, and the desire to develop a
process specifically to address value attunement in support of interpretive learning and subsequent decisionmaking. Our value-based decision-making model presented here provides an environment for encouraging
multiple value-based perspectives and mediating value
conflicts [29,28,62]. This will ultimately provide an organization with a value attunement process [60] that will
support shared interpretation that is necessary to effectively solve problems. Such a model, and ultimately a
system or system component based on that model, is a
necessary step to extending decision support research.
We begin this study by discussing individual values
and their place in organizational decision-making. Development of the value-based decision-making model is
then discussed, followed by a test of a component based
on the properties of the VBDM model. We end with
the implications of the model to practice, theory, and
research.
2. Individual values and decision-making
Values are discussed prominently in the literature although there is some disagreement regarding the definition and effect of these values. Meglino and Ravlin
[44] define a value as an internalized belief regarding
appropriate behavior; this impacts (among other things)
how an individual interprets information. The authors
conduct a comprehensive review of the literature and
propose a framework for identifying and classifying existing values research, pointing out the iterative nature of
values and the way that values can influence both perception and behavior. The authors also discuss the need
for individuals to reach an understanding of each other's
value systems (in Spranger's [56] words, value profiles)

1589

in order to effectively coordinate action such as reaching
a decision. This is the shared interpretation outcome of
interpretive learning [28,29].
Shared interpretation requires a method by which
individuals agree on a classification scheme for interpreting facts and variables in the decision context. Categorizing can lead decision-makers to consider and
integrate context-specific information and make better
decisions [6,27,50]. Categorization may be facilitated by
cognitive mapping, a tool that allows individuals to organize their beliefs in a manner that increases understanding of their reasoning process. Individual values are
frequently referred to as cognitive maps [7,17] making
them a natural candidate not only for categorization, but
also for operationalizing beliefs. Encouraging the application of values has a positive impact on organizational
decision-making behavior (e.g., [48,52]).
Value-laden contexts present special problems for
negotiating and decision-making, particularly when an
individual's core values are prominent [62]. Providing a
social environment in which these value conflicts may be
surfaced and addressed may help alleviate biases associated with values and mediate affective responses from
individual decision-makers. An organization that has the
ability to surface and store multiple value-based perspectives will enhance its ability to solve problems [60]. The
ability to surface the dissention created by differing values (and hence value-based perspectives) is necessary
for interpretive learning [28,29]. Understanding individual values will serve to increase the number of valuebased perspectives from which an organization may
view, interpret, and act on newly acquired information
and to create knowledge [20,21].
Individual values are an integral part of an individual's behavior, particularly early in the decisionmaking process because they form the foundation of an
individual's perspective. We maintain that decision support processes and components can be developed that
enhance the use of personal values and promote value
attunement. However, there has been limited research in
the area of personal values and decision support, despite
research suggesting that individual and organizational
values are evident in organizations and that conflict is a
natural outcome of a diverse population [34,52]. When
conflict is mediated, the process may lead to synthesized
perspectives that serve to expand organizational memory
and further enhance shared interpretation [20,21]. This
expanded organizational memory also serves to promote
understanding of another's perspective (perspective taking [8]) which in turn enhances comprehensible communication [38], another facilitator of shared communication
and interpretation.

1590

D.J. Hall, R.A. Davis / Decision Support Systems 43 (2007) 1588–1604

Researchers have called for additional investigation
into the human side of decision-making and support.
Stohr and Konsynski [58] suggest a framework for decision process research which acknowledges the importance of the complexity of people and their individual
characteristics and suggest that those characteristics be
studied. Meglino and Ravlin [44] indicate that we know
too little about how values affect behavior and call for
more attention to decision-making behavior rather than
decision outcome.
Following the call for advancing decision support
research by focusing on decision behavior and the characteristics that affect it, we propose that (1) individual
values are an integral factor of decision behavior, (2)
those values form the foundation of an individual's perspective during tasks associated with decision-making,
(3) that little is truly known about their impact, and (4)
that a decision model can be designed to support a value
attunement process. Accordingly, we present the development of our value-based decision-making (VBDM)
model and the initial empirical test results that validate
the concept.
3. Developing the value-based decision-making
model
Creating an environment that fosters a process both to
recognize and to synthesize value profiles can be difficult. One barrier is the definition of individual values that
should be considered when designing such an environment. A second barrier is finding a solid platform on
which to base the design. We address the first barrier by
identifying a value construct suitable for research use,
and the second barrier by selecting an established theoretical foundation for our platform.
3.1. Defining the value construct
Because this study examines value-based perspectives, it is important that we adequately define what we
mean by “value” and properly position this work in the
larger context of the study of values. In this work, we
follow the work of Eduard Spranger [56] who believed
that individuals have a value profile that is based on
theoretical, social, political, religious, aesthetic, and economic values. The theoretical value dimension is based
on the discovery of truth and knowledge in a rational and
scientific way. This dimension is very functional and
works best when the situation or problem can be structured. The social value dimension incorporates an interpretive, philanthropic view—it seeks human interaction
and considers the impact of action on the group or or-

ganization as a whole. The political value dimension is
concerned with prestige and power, often at the expense
of others, and incorporates a critical and power-oriented
view. The religious value dimension aspires to make the
world a better place, and is based on philosophical and
interpretive views. The aesthetic value dimension views
the world from an artistic, interpretive view and seeks to
find form and harmony in a given scenario. The economic value dimension arises from a functional, practical view and seeks usability and material goods.
A person may exhibit one strong value such as religious, or exhibit a pattern of importance to multiple
values. For instance, a typical masculine value profile is
high on the economic, political, and theoretical dimensions and correspondingly low on the religious, social,
and aesthetic ones [1,41]. This deeply ingrained value
profile impacts the way that an individual views and
interprets the world and seeks information; the perspective based on the profile is the value-based perspective
that is the focus of this research. Such a deeply founded
perspective affects decisions by imparting a value bias
that is generally not recognized by the individual [18].
Value profiles have been shown to remain relatively static over time [41], making them an appropriate construct
and supporting their use as a measurement tool. Values,
however, are not exclusive to individuals.
Organizations exhibit the same types of value profiles, although the economic and theoretical dimensions
are often predominant in business. In fact, it is interesting
to note the similarities between the Spranger [56] value
dimensions and the business value clusters advanced by
Frederick [16]. Frederick defined five clusters of values
necessary for business consideration: economical, environmental, political, technological, and that comprised
of values within the individual. Using Spranger's [56]
value dimensions together defines the fifth cluster, but
one can also immediately see the similarities between the
first four business clusters and the individual dimensions
of the Spranger value profile.
3.2. Defining the theoretical foundation
Courtney [12] discusses a decision-making paradigm
for use in complex, dynamic environments. He suggests
the use of an inquiring organizational structure to implement such a paradigm, and maintains that, at the center of
the paradigm, is a structure known as a mental model.
This model is guided by an individual's experience and
value profile that defines the value-based perspective
that an individual uses to make sense of a new problem
scenario and to generate potential solutions. However,
to be effective, a process must be in place that allows

D.J. Hall, R.A. Davis / Decision Support Systems 43 (2007) 1588–1604

individuals to expand their mental models in a way that
allows alternative perspectives to be evaluated. This
research defines a support system designed to evaluate
the effectiveness of using individual value profiles as the
basis of perspective development. There must be a point
at which most perspectives have been acknowledged, as
one cannot expect all possible perspectives to be represented in every mental model, whether it is individual
or collective. It may be prudent, therefore, to begin the
process of perspective examination by defining major
perspectives from which individuals may approach a
decision-making scenario, and include those in the
model.
We believe that to truly support the humanness of
organizations as Courtney suggests, we must begin at
the foundation of an individual's beliefs and perspectives; that is, their individual values on which beliefs
are founded and perspectives are framed. This is also
in keeping with our second theoretical foundation, the
contention of Hine et al. [28,29] that an individual's
beliefs provide the foundation for their interpretative
learning process. We argue that when perspective development takes place on a deeper level, an organization is
more likely to consistently surface and mediate value
conflict. We also believe that perspective development
and perspective synthesis are both necessary and are, in
fact, engaged in a reciprocal relationship for any given
context. These beliefs are the foundation for our valuebased decision-making (VBDM) model.
4. The value-based decision-making model
Given the above discussion, it is easy to see that
understanding the framework an individual develops to

1591

view and thus interpret their surroundings is important to
understanding decision-making behavior and may allow
us to predict behavior in a specific context. Thus, it is not
only important that we strive to understand how valuebased perspectives affect decision-making, but also that
we encourage organizations to incorporate as many valuebased perspectives into a specific context as possible.
Mitroff and Linstone [46] suggest a minimum of three
perspectives (technical, social, and personal); Courtney
[12] suggests adding ethical and aesthetic. This view is
also represented by others who maintain that organizations should promote ethical behavior and social responsibility (e.g., [55,60]). We maintain that an individual's
interpretation of events and their subsequent actions are
founded on their perspective that is defined by their value
profile. Thus, the pertinent perspectives to address must
be all of those that make up an individual's value profile
(theoretical, social, political, religious, aesthetic, and
economic).
To achieve the benefits of multiple perspectives, all
perspectives based on individuals' value profiles should
be represented in a decision-making scenario. We maintain that our foundation of individual values enables an
organization to focus on a defined set of perspectives.
Rather than being different from those perspectives of
Courtney's model, value-based perspectives are enhancements to them by formally defining each perspective. In fact, there are obvious parallels between Mitroff
and Linstone's technical, organizational, and personal
perspectives and Spranger's value dimensions. For instance, like their technical perspective, the theoretical
perspective is rational and functional. Likewise, there are
parallels between Courtney's ethical and aesthetic perspectives and the corresponding value dimensions

Table 1
Extending Mitroff and Linstone's TOP model and Courtney's paradigm with Spranger's values
Perspectives in the value-based decision-making model
Spranger [56]
Mitroff and
Linstone [46]
Courtney [12]
Worldview

Theoretical
Technical

Social
Organizational

Political
Personal

Religious

Aesthetic

Economic

Technical
Organizational
Personal
Ethical
Aesthetic
Scientific, rational Collective,
Individual, power
Philosophical, moral
Artistic
Practical
philanthropic
Goal
Problem solving, Action, stability,
Power, influence,
Equitability, elevation Harmony, artistry
Usability,
product
process
prestige
of mankind
pragmatism
Mode of inquiry Functional
Interpretive
Critical
Interpretive
Interpretive
Functional
General
Empirical, rational, Altruistic,
Competitive, egoMoral, ethical, seeks Diverse, appreciates Utilitarian,
characteristics seeks the “truth”
philanthropic, seeks centric, seeks power unity with the universe beauty, seeks form wealth-oriented,
human interaction
and harmony
seeks tangible
goods
Decision criteria Best fit to data
Societal gain
Individual gain
Highest level
Highest level of
Highest cost/
of understanding
harmony and design benefit ratio

1592

D.J. Hall, R.A. Davis / Decision Support Systems 43 (2007) 1588–1604

discussed previously (religious and aesthetic, respectively). Each of the value dimensions as suggested by
Spranger [56] can form the basis of decision-making
perspectives and together are the foundation of the
VBDM model conceptualized herein. Table 1 compares
the perspectives advanced by Mitroff and Linstone [46]
and Courtney [12] to our perspectives that are based on
Spranger's [56] value typology.
Mitroff and Linstone [46] examine several facets of
the technical, organizational, and personal perspectives,
such as each perspective's goals and worldview, as
well its mode of inquiry and decision criteria. Both of
Courtney's perspectives (ethical and aesthetic) and the
additional perspective from Spranger's [56] work (economic) can be examined in the same way. The worldview
of the ethical (Spranger's religious) perspective is philosophical and morally based. The aesthetic perspective
views the world from an artistic lens, while the economic
perspective is highly pragmatic. Each of these perspectives has specific goals that match its worldview.
The mode of inquiry as discussed by Mitroff and
Linstone is the way that the perspective views a problem
and formulates the solution. A functional mode of inquiry
supports the idea that organizations use inquiry to support
or achieve organizational objectives, relying on known
processes and information to facilitate organizational
goals and minimally increase organizational knowledge.

Such a mode is adequate in situations where there are
known variables, the problem is at worst moderately
unstructured, and a solution is likely to be attained. The
interpretive mode of inquiry applies a social theory to
information, stressing communication and interpretation
in the system. Socially oriented knowledge is the outcome
of this perspective which closely parallels interpretive
learning [28,29]. The third mode of inquiry is the critical
mode; this mode is concerned with examining the status
quo for flaws, conflicts, or contradictions and bringing
those shortcomings to light. Both the interpretive and
critical modes of inquiry management are socially oriented
and therefore support the human aspect of a system. On
the other hand, current approaches to learning and
decision-making are decidedly functional, with a potential
toward some element of the interpretive perspective (for
instance, group decision support systems).
Because value-based perspectives form the basis of
an individual's behavior, they must be acknowledged
in organizations that wish to surface as many perspectives as possible in a decision-making context [20,21].
To accomplish this goal, organizations must encourage
interpretive relationships among individuals and celebrate the differences of those individuals. To reduce
conflict between organizational members, these relationships must exist in an environment where each
perspective is recognized; this environment must also

Fig. 1. The value-based decision-making model.

D.J. Hall, R.A. Davis / Decision Support Systems 43 (2007) 1588–1604

allow for continuous updating of the collective mental
model. Accordingly, Fig. 1 presents the framework of
the VBDM model.
A traditional problem-solving or decision-making
approach is to react to problem recognition (the trigger in
Fig. 1) by formulating alternative solutions quickly from
generally known information (that is, foregoing investigation and knowledge creation) and choosing a solution to implement. Two problems are associated with this
method. The first is that failure to investigate all perspectives may lead to incorrect or incomplete problem definition or a lack of appropriate alternative solutions. The
second is that, very often, the process of decision-making
ends with implementation; this lack of feedback may
prevent outcome-based learning. Courtney's [12] model
and our extension address both problems by advocating
the use of perspectives and by providing for a continuously updated mental model.
Courtney discusses this process in terms of a Singerian “sweeping in” process that gathers information from
an ever-widening set of stakeholders. In this process, the
breadth of perspectives involved in the decision-making
processes increases simply by increasing the amount of
input; such breadth may contribute to more informed
decisions, but not necessarily to shared interpretation
that is fostered by socially constructed information and
understanding.
Our extension addresses the social construction of
information and interpretation by promoting an iterative
relationship between organizational memory, environ-

1593

mental variables, and the decision-makers. Facts may be
interpreted in a multitude of ways depending on the
perspective of the interpreter; shared interpretation can
only occur when the basis behind the interpretation is
discussed or when the individuals involved have already
achieved an understanding of each others' perspectives.
Each fact to be considered during a particular context
is discussed, and any conflicts of interpretation must
be resolved with additional information gathered from
group members, organizational memory, and/or the environment. Ideally, this iterative process (analyze, gather, analyze…) continues until the group reaches not only
a shared interpretation of that fact, but also a deeper
understanding of the social environment in which the
group is operating. The perspective development (PD)
process is detailed in Fig. 2.
An individual's beliefs are based on their value
profile and parallel the concept of a mental model [12].
The underlying foundation of our model (an individual's
value profile) remains relatively stable, yet beliefs based
on those values (i.e., mental model) may be modified as
PD takes place. This involves updating beliefs based on
newly acquired information, considering available options, developing new intentions from the set of available
options, and acting on those new intentions. This, in turn,
modifies the mental model, and contributes to a shared
interpretation of the events.
Acquiring information with which to analyze changes
or triggers is dependent in part on the ability to access organizational memory. In the VBDM model,

Fig. 2. Perspective development.

1594

D.J. Hall, R.A. Davis / Decision Support Systems 43 (2007) 1588–1604

organizational memory is represented by two storage
areas, the database, and the knowledge base. Facts are
stored in the database that represents explicit knowledge
in organizational memory. Shared interpretations are
ultimately stored in the knowledge base which, over
time, expands organizational memory to include information from multiple value-based perspectives and
interpretations. Although one decision context will
likely only develop information relevant to that context,
over time that information may be synthesized to form
relevant information for other contexts. Ultimately, each
decision-maker believes that he or she has developed a
shared interpretation of the events, and the process
moves toward perspective synthesis.
The perspective synthesis process has two aspects—
the problem space in which the problem is structured and
potential alternative solutions are discussed, and the
solution space where approved alternative solutions are
placed. It is from this set that the eventual solution will be
chosen and action will be taken. In the synthesis process,
surfacing of unseen conflict is critical and both consensus and conflict sets [28,29] are necessary. Fig. 3 shows
the details of the perspective synthesis process.
Although each decision-maker believes he or she
understands the perspective of the others, he or she may
still not fully appreciate the conflict that each perspective
may produce when alternative solutions are suggested.
Alternative solutions are divided into two categories—
those that the group agrees are feasible solutions
(consensus set), and those on which there is no consensus (conflict set). Discussion regarding items in the
conflict set is necessary to either (1) mediate the conflict,
or (2) remove the item from consideration. It is during
this time that interactivity between perspective development and synthesis is most noticeable. When items are in
question, it is most natural to secure additional information on that item. This returns the decision-making
group to the PD process, where additional information is

acquired and acted on. This may change the shared
interpretation of the group and allow synthesis. It is also
possible that the item will not reach consensus despite
additional development. Regardless, additional knowledge has been gained and is reflected in organizational
memory.
We believe that such a model, and a component based
thereon, is a natural extension of a decision support system as described by Bonczek et al. [9]. For instance, the
PD component may be placed between the user and the
model or between the user and the data. Either way,
exposing the user to additional perspectives will broaden
their information-gathering and decision-making scope,
allowing for analysis that is more complete. The perspective synthesis component is a natural fit as part of
the model component; drawing in information based on
multiple perspectives and analyzing it together in a way
that allows the best alternatives with more stakeholder
consideration to be considered.
Although interpretive learning and expanding organizational mental models are group-oriented processes,
initial research into an area as individual as value profiles
is best performed at the individual level. Therefore, in
order to show that our chosen value-profile basis can be
used to manipulate the actions of individuals, we tested a
perspective development component based on our model
for its ability to change a decision-maker's behavior.
5. Testing the perspective development component
In this research, a component has been implemented
as a user interface that queries motivation behind both
chosen and unchosen actions in an attempt to develop
that individual's knowledge of alternative perspectives
that are often based on differing assumptions, some of
which may be conflicting. Recognizing and considering
other perspectives exposes any different assumptions
that may be influencing stakeholders, allowing the

Fig. 3. Perspective synthesis.

D.J. Hall, R.A. Davis / Decision Support Systems 43 (2007) 1588–1604

decision-maker(s) to determine which assumptions are
accurate and consequently to attain a better understanding of the problem at hand. Better understanding
typically leads to better decision-making (e.g.,
[2,15,29]). However, decision-makers often engage in
the information gathering and choice processes from a
perspective biased by their value profile, and are often
unaware that they are being affected by them [18].
In some decision contexts, such as a crisis or when
confronted by a new or novel set of circumstances, people may be forced to make decisions with limited information or time available for analysis. In such contexts,
the set of alternatives developed, and ultimately the alternative chosen, may be greatly affected by the personal
values and the perspective those values precipitate. Because an individual's perspective affects and biases their
response in decision situations, we must build systems to
help an individual consider multiple perspectives so that
the assumptions of others are surfaced and analyzed,
which in turn may promote shared mental models and a
broadened organizational perspective.
A shared mental model is critical to organizational
learning and effective group decision-making, but in
order to arrive at that state, the individuals involved must
first broaden the scope of their thinking to understand the
thinking of those around them (e.g., [29]). Further, the
broader the range of perspectives and alternatives considered, the more informed the eventual choice (e.g.,
[33,61]). More informed choices are better and result in
more satisfying decisions, all other things being equal
(e.g., [45]). One way to broaden the number of perspectives used in a decision context may be accomplished by
having each participant complete a series of questions
regarding the current decision domain from a number of
other perspectives, perhaps by being asked to articulate
both good and bad points of a given problem or alternative, thus forcing the issue (e.g., problem or alternative) to be considered from two sides (e.g., [32,49]). This
is the approach taken in this research.
Because the area of values is complex and broad, and
values are the foundation of many personal decisions and
actions, it is important to define how we measure values
in the context of our research. This research accepts the
notion of values as espoused by Spranger, and operationalizes those values by using the Allport–Vernon–
Lindzey (AVL) Study of Values [1]. We consider the
value profile to be the pattern of relative importance of
each of Spranger's values (theoretical, social, political,
religious, aesthetic, and economic) to an individual, as
constructed from the results of the AVL instrument. A
value-based perspective is the worldview that an individual develops as a result of his or her underlying value

1595

profile; thus, we are able to estimate their value-based
perspective. For example, if an individual scores highly
on economic and political values (i.e., their profile exhibits stronger concern for these dimensions), we can
assume that their value-based perspective will be one
that focuses on the “bottom line” and on power/political
issues over, for instance, the social value of a program.
Value-based judgments are actions taken implicitly or
explicitly that are based on an individual's value profile.
System performance must be defined within the
context of its use. For instance, one reasonable performance test for a functional system (for instance, a payroll
system) may be the accuracy of its output. For an expert
support system, performance may be less well defined
and be assessed in terms of the organizational performance based on decision-making facilitated by the system. For a component used within a complex decisionmaking scenario, the definition of performance is even
more ill defined. In this research, the performance of the
perspective development system will be compared to that
of a control system, and the measure of performance is
the system's ability to affect the value profile applied in a
specific decision context. It is posited that decisions
made by users of a system containing a PD component
will exhibit a change in the value profile applied not
evident in the behavior of users of a system without such
a component (the control group). Thus, hypothesis one
is:
H1. Use of a perspective development component will
alter the value profile applied by an individual on a subsequent similar task.
Changing the value profile applied to a task may be
accomplished without specifically deviating from one's
stated values. It would be possible, for instance, for a
decision-maker to modify their action in response to a
treatment without deviating from their underlying value
profile. As previous research has suggested, PD should
allow the decision-maker to envision a wider range of
perspectives and, at least temporarily, think “outside the
box.” Therefore, it is posited that being asked to challenge the status quo by considering multiple perspectives
of an issue increases the “breadth of concern” ([32],
p. 202) and results in perspective development. Thus,
hypothesis two is:
H2. Use of a perspective development component will
result in an applied value profile that differs from that
individual's stated value profile.
The subjects used in this study were undergraduate
students at a major Southwestern university. These subjects are appropriate for a judgmental task pertaining to

1596

D.J. Hall, R.A. Davis / Decision Support Systems 43 (2007) 1588–1604

Fig. 4. Value profile (AVL).

values because they are not likely to have experience
with the requirements of the task, and thus are more
likely to react instinctively (i.e., follow their value-based
perspective) and less likely to consider social norms in
their responses. This is the scenario presented earlier
when individuals have no information on which to act,
are in a new situation, and therefore must rely on their
value-based perspective. Also, because the task requires
no specific knowledge or training, response bias is unlikely. Studies of various value instruments indicate that
values can be assessed early in an individual's development and that value-based instruments are reliable for
individuals at the high school level or above and do not
discriminate based on age (e.g., [1,54]). Therefore, it is
reasonable to believe that the results of this study will
generalize to other populations. Subjects ranged in age
from 19 to 22 and were distributed across all classifications (freshman to senior). Business students comprised
61% of the sample; 39% of the sample was male.
An individual's value profile was determined using
the Allport–Vernon–Lindzey (AVL) Study of Values [1]
that measures the relative strength of each of an indi-

vidual's value dimensions (theoretical, social, political,
religious, aesthetic, and economic). This instrument has
withstood time, three revisions by the authors, and one
recent revision by other researchers [37], who did not
find significant differences in responses between their
instrument and the original one. The task involved the
disbursement of funds among six community-based
programs, each of which corresponds to a value-based
perspective as determined by Spranger [56]. This task
was developed by the GDSS research project at the University of Minnesota [14], was extensively tested, and
was specifically designed to work with the AVL. The
task/AVL combination has been validated in previous
research (e.g., [63]). In this task, subjects must allocate
$500,000 among the six programs. All the funds must be
allocated; each subject may choose whether to allocate
all the funds to one program, or split the funds among
two or more programs. Our results indicate that both the
instrument and the task functioned as expected in our
sample population.
Two systems were developed that presented the
subject with a program that administered a short

Fig. 5. Distribution profile (Task 1).

D.J. Hall, R.A. Davis / Decision Support Systems 43 (2007) 1588–1604

1597

Fig. 6. Distribution profile (Task 2).

demographic survey, the value-based perspective study
(i.e., the AVL Study of Values which is administered in
two sections), and two funds disbursement tasks. The
perspective development system (i.e., the treatment
condition) was different from the control system in
only one aspect. It contained an alternative perspective
consideration component designed to encourage the
subject to consider all sides of a given problem. The
treatment was activated following the first funds
distribution task; the control group received an intervening break between the two tasks that consisted of a
page from the “Foundation” thanking them for their
“good work” in the first funding task and asking that they
continue their job as “trustee” through one more round of
funding.
Tasks 1 and 2 were similar in style (six programs to
which to distribute $500,000, each aligned to one of
Spranger's values), but the programs outlined in Task 2
were distinctly different from those in Task 1. Thus, the
second task was a similar decision domain, as opposed
to a re-examination of a previous decision (because
of space limitations, specific funding request projects
and their corresponding values are available from the
authors). The results of the second funds distribution task
provide evidence of whether the manipulation succeeded
in changing the subject's response to funding requests.
Results from the AVL and the funds tasks were used
to build profiles for analysis. These profiles provide the
basis for comparison between treatment and control
group responses.

6. Results
Preliminary data analysis was performed to ensure
data integrity and to make adjustments as necessary for
removing outliers and establishing covariates. Because
of the size of the sample (n = 388), evenness of the distribution (nt = 193; nc = 195), and lack of missing data, no
violation of assumptions was expected nor found; no
impact of covariates or outliers was detected. This preliminary analysis confirmed that study requirements and
that assumptions critical to statistical analysis were not
violated.
The primary method of analysis used in this study is
profile analysis, a multivariate form of repeated measures ANOVA. The intent is to discern patterns of responses over groups, rather than look at the individual
measures. This type of analysis is common in the social
sciences where groups of related characteristics are of
interest (e.g., [36,43]), and is particularly useful in situations where the measures have a complex relationship
such as the data analyzed here.
Because all of the subjects are from the same general
population and were randomly assigned to the control or
treatment group, no difference in their profiles was expected for the administration of the AVL or the first
execution of the funds distribution task. However, these
assumptions required testing before hypothesis testing
began. As expected, no significant differences in profiles
were found for the AVL (F = 0.57, p = 0.72, ηp2 = 0.007).
This indicates the control and treatment groups exhibited

Table 2
Significance level when comparing treatment and control group mean differences for the first and second funds distributions

Task 1
Task 2

Aesthetic

Economic

Social

Religious

Political

Theoretical

p = 0.85
p b 0.05⁎

0.98
0.08

0.81
0.89

0.47
b0.01⁎

0.13
0.68

0.33
b0.01⁎

⁎Significant at α = 0.05.

1598

D.J. Hall, R.A. Davis / Decision Support Systems 43 (2007) 1588–1604

Table 3
Correlation between the value profile and the distribution profile (Task 2) for each group [correlation (p-value)]
Aesthetic

Economic

Social

Religious

Political

Theoretical

Pre-treatment (all correlations significant)
Control
0.28 (b0.0001)
0.25 (0.0003)
Treatment
0.22 (0.0019)
0.20 (0.0067)

0.15 (0.0404)
0.14 (0.0481)

0.30 (b0.0001)
0.33 (b0.0001)

0.33 (b0.0001)
0.35 (b0.0001)

0.15 (0.0331)
0.18 (0.0113)

Post-treatment
Control
0.25 (0.0005)
Treatment
0.20 (0.0045)

0.18 (0.0099)
0 (0.9954)⁎⁎

0.58 (b0.0001)
0.38 (b0.0001)

0.16 (0.0298)
0.18 (0.0130)

0.25 (0.0005)
0.10 (0.1822)⁎⁎

0.31 (b0.0001)
−0.01 (0.8583)⁎⁎

⁎⁎Not significant.

similar value profiles. These same results were evident in
the profiles of the first funds distribution task (F = 0.73,
p = 0.60, ηp2 = 0.009), indicating that both groups allocated funds similarly between each program. Further, the
means of the responses differed significantly over each
of the six programs indicating the groups had preferred
dimensions. Fig. 4 clearly shows that the profiles are
almost indistinguishable for value responses, and Fig. 5
shows the same for the first funds distribution task.
These results indicate that any post-treatment differences
between the groups can reasonably be attributed to the
treatment.
7. Hypothesis analysis
As previously stated, hypothesis 1 examines whether
subjects in the treatment group allocated funds differently in the second funds distribution task as compared to
the first, indicating they placed different emphases on
each value-based perspective after the treatment. As expected, analysis results show evidence to reject similarity
between groups in the second task indicating that there
are significant differences in the way the two groups
distributed funds (F = 5.1, p b 0.01, ηp2 = 0.063). This
supports our hypothesis that behavior on a similar task
will differ following exposure to a PD component. Fig. 6
shows the profiles for each group for the second funds
distribution task.
There were no significant differences in the amount of
funds distributed to each program in Task 1 between the
two groups, as would be expected between groups with
similar profiles. However, while the distribution profiles
of the groups differed significantly in Task 2, results of
pairwise comparisons, adjusted for multiple comparisons, indicate that not all dimensions differed equally
(see Table 2). Specifically, the groups distributed similar
amounts of funds to the political and social programs, a
different amount to the economic program, and significantly different amounts to the aesthetic, theoretical, and
religious programs.

The second previously stated hypothesis investigates
whether an individual will be able to deviate from his or
her stated value profile; each group's stated value profile
was compared to their second funds distribution task
profile. For purposes of this research, a subject exhibits
perspective development if their post-treatment distribution profile (i.e., the results of Task 2) and their
value profile (i.e., as determined by the AVL) are different. Statistically this could be evidenced by a lack
of correlation between the professed importance of a
value and the amount of funds given to a corresponding
program.
As expected, the control group's allocation of funds
in the second funds distribution task is consistent with its
response to the values study, statistically supported by
Pearson Correlations shown in Table 3 (correlations all
significant at p ≤ 0.05). The pattern of the value profile
generally matched the pattern of the funds distribution
profile for the second task. Note that we are not focusing
on the relative difference between funds distribution for
any one program, but rather the pattern of consistent
correlation. For instance, the religious value received
high responses; the religious program received the most
funding. The theoretical value received low responses;
correspondingly, the theoretically based program received low funding (see Fig. 6). This pattern is consistent
across the task.
Such was not the case with the treatment group, however. Correlation analysis indicates that the treatment
group changed their scores on the economic, social, and
theoretical dimensions, which suggests the treatment
group exhibited a perspective development effect. For
instance, although the aesthetic value was the fifth ranked value in the sample, it received the third highest
proportion of funding. It received more, in fact, than the
economic program although the economic value was
ranked considerably higher. The subjects who received
the treatment exhibited an applied value profile that is
different from their stated value profile, thus supporting
the second hypothesis that the treatment condition would

D.J. Hall, R.A. Davis / Decision Support Systems 43 (2007) 1588–1604

result in a behavior pattern (applied value profile) that
differed from their stated values.
8. Discussion
This study has examined whether a component
designed to support an individual's use of multiple
perspectives during a decision-making task can be
conceptually developed and empirically tested. Specifically, the results are evidence of the consideration of
multiple value-based perspectives and of reduced value
bias. One might argue that the change in the treatment
subjects' behaviors can be explained by increased
creativity or innovativeness or just simple alignment
with conscious thoughts of one's values. Alternatively,
perhaps the treatment subjects adapted their behavior in
some sense to produce the behavior they believed was
desired by the researcher. We note that only the treatment
group, the group encouraged to consider other perspectives, behaved in this way. We noted earlier the benefits
of considering a decision domain from a wide perspective: increased creativity, innovation, and adaptability
[11,32]. Thus, even if the treatment group's behaviors
can be described as creative, innovative, or adaptive, we
believe the controlled nature of the laboratory experiment supports our conclusion that perspective development led to this behavior because the control group did
not behave in the same way. Creativity, innovation,
adaptability, and so forth are different effects.
There is clear precedent for our conclusion on this
point. Parker and Axtell [49] cite research from the study
of human development that it is the ability to take the
perspective of others that leads to greater empathy [4],
higher levels of cognitive complexity [26], moral development [35], and managerial effectiveness [64]. For
example, for empathy to occur, an individual must first
recognize that something is happening to someone else
and have some understanding of how the other person is
feeling. In all of these cases, the driver of the behavior
change is consideration of other perspectives.
The primary finding of this research is that an individual's decision-making behavior can be changed in
value-based situations. Previous research has suggested
that the individual differences caused in part by value
profiles may be too complex to be managed effectively in
system design [30], but must be acknowledged as antecedents for the outcome of technological endeavors such
as MIS acceptance and success [13,65]. This research,
however, suggests that it is possible, through a system
component such as that developed here, to change the
behavior of decision-makers in a specific decision
domain.

1599

Supporting a decision-maker's consideration of multiple perspectives can, at least temporarily, alter the decision-maker's applied value profile during that decision
task so that a wider range of values are given due consideration. Broadened perspective bases have practical
benefits to an organization. For instance, the other effects
mentioned above (innovation, creativity, and adaptability) become crucial in decision domains of complex problems, particularly socially oriented ones. An organization
can utilize support systems designed to broaden perspectives, especially value-based perspectives, to create, accumulate, and manage knowledge critical to its core
competencies.
As an individual's perspective base expands, so does
that individual's ability to see a bigger picture. When a
group of individuals are brought together in this way, the
problem space developed by that group becomes bigger,
allowing for a wider range of alternatives to be generated
and more informed choices to be made [29,33,61]. Consideration of multiple perspectives also allows an individual to perceive and process information that may not
have been considered useful under a different lens, which
is an antecedent to organizational learning. An increased
amount of information useful in a particular domain has
been shown to increase decision quality [57]. The valuebased component tested in this research encouraged individuals to consider and use multiple perspectives during
a decision task. When information based on these perspectives is incorporated into organizational memory, it
becomes available for other decision domains.
It is interesting to note which value-based dimensions
were mediated. It should come as little surprise that the
individuals could not be persuaded to deviate from funding the religious program as this value was the strongest
among the subjects. The characteristics of the religious
value include faith, acceptance, and a respect for the
rights of people [19]. Individuals with a high religious
value profile tend to be empathetic, concerned with
social welfare, and idealistic; such faith-based, idealistic
values are less likely to respond to manipulation [3].
Theoretical programs may have had appeal given the
student population of the study; aesthetic support may
have come from a feeling of community that is common
on campuses.
However, the ability to manipulate the economic, theoretical, and social value-based perspectives is a valuable finding. Numerous studies have indicated that the
economic and theoretical dimensions are the strongest of
the dimensions in individuals representing managerial
positions (e.g., [1,39]). Mitigating the effect of these
values should allow organizations to move away from
the technical perspective of decision-making and toward

1600

D.J. Hall, R.A. Davis / Decision Support Systems 43 (2007) 1588–1604

the organizational and personal perspectives as suggested by Mitroff and Linstone [46].
Indeed, a decision support environment that integrates the multiple perspective support as we have described and tested here moves organizations toward
what Mitroff and Linstone [46] describe as the “third
way of knowing”, that is, multiple realities. They state,
“…the assumption is that on problems of any significance, the analyst, decision-maker, or policy-maker
needs to explicitly see a range of different representations of the problem so that he or she can participate
actively in the problem solving process…” (p. 63, their
emphasis). The hope that they put forth is that exposure
to a range of perspectives (i.e., representations) will
allow the decision-maker to produce a new, stronger
perspective that synthesizes the ones reviewed. The
social value-based perspective may also enable these
organizations to be more cognizant of their social responsibilities and the impact of their actions on their
communities.
9. Implications
The VBDM model discussed above provides organizations with the means to surface, consider, and encourage multiple perspectives based on values. Because
an individual's values provide the foundation for his or
her beliefs, perspectives, and ultimately his or her decisions, investigation into this area is important for an
understanding of decision-making behavior in organizations as well as the complementary area of organizational
learning; there are implications for practice and theory.
9.1. Practical implications
A practical implication of the VBDM model is that it
provides the basis for engaging an organization in active
consideration of values. In an era when an organization's
social responsibility is more prominent, such a consideration may not only be advisable, but may be unavoidable in certain areas, such as policy formulation and other
ideologically based issues. Wade-Benzoni et al. [62] discuss barriers to ideologically based negotiations wherein
they define those contexts to be societal issues. These
issues may be difficult to resolve because individual
values limit how an individual interprets the information,
especially when a particular issue is closely related to a
value held with deep conviction. Research shows that,
when an individual is presented with a problem that
evokes strong sentiment (either positive or negative), he
or she is more likely to focus narrowly than to embrace
other information or ideas (e.g., [62]). The VBDM model

specifically strives to mediate this unifocus by first acknowledging that all members of the group have closely
held beliefs, and encouraging communication between
the members such that the beliefs and their related assumptions are surfaced and discussed. This moves the
organization toward value-attuned responsiveness—the
understanding that complex (primarily social) decision
contexts such as policy formulation are inseparable from
individual values [60].
Formulating and ultimately solving ill-structured
problems may also benefit from a model such as ours.
Organizations often rely on their members to make
decisions in a changing and unpredictable environment
that produces these types of problems. Intuitive decisionmaking is routinely used in these situations where a
manager interprets the environment and reacts to a “gut
feeling.” Further, research shows that information that is
used in these situations is socially constructed [40].
Intuitive action enables an individual to come to understand a situation without explicit analysis [31]. Effective intuition requires not only the individual's ability to
judge the problem at hand, but also the environment in
which the problem is situated. Although these mental
models are rarely, if ever, complete, they guide subsequent decision-making behavior [47]. As managers routinely engage in active interpretation during the VBDM
model process, their mental models expand, perhaps
moving the models toward a more complete state, and
thus eliminating some element of uncertainty about the
judgment.
9.2. Theoretical implications
On a theoretical level, the VBDM model, with its
focus on a small set of core personal values extends
individual value usage within the organization. Swanson
[60] encourages research to develop a theory of values
that may provide the attunement process with some level
of explanatory power, and that may help to focus understanding of individual values and their impact on
individual (and particularly executive) behavior. By providing a defined set of values that may be measured by
established instruments (e.g., the Study of Values [1]), a
theory of individual values may be constructed and
tested.
Using a model such as the VBDM model may not
only enhance an organization's understanding of the
values that its members hold, but it may also help the
individuals better understand themselves. Self-perception theory indicates that individuals may not be fully
aware of what their value profile is or even that one
exists. Instead, individuals, if aware of values, may

D.J. Hall, R.A. Davis / Decision Support Systems 43 (2007) 1588–1604

deduce what those values are based on their actions in
different situations just as an observer may deduce an
individual's values based on that person's actions [5].
The VBDM model allows an organization to disseminate
concrete information to its members regarding the value
profile, thus allowing individuals to become aware of the
values they hold. In turn, this awareness of one's own
values will enhance understanding of another's values,
which should promote fewer value-based conflicts.
Lastly, the VBDM model conceptualized here may
provide the basis for the individual representation scheme
necessary for successful interpretive organizational
learning [28]. First, the use of the value set chosen
allows organizations (or researchers) to focus on and
perhaps test two foundations of interpretive organizational learning (IOL). The first is an understanding of the
contextual interpretation of a given individual, and the
second is the ability to understand potential alignment
and/or interaction of those interpretations. By acknowledging a discrete set of values, and understanding how
alliances or conflict may arise within that set, an
organization should be able to provide the surfacing of
conflict necessary to IOL. Hine et al. [28] also suggest
requirements for an individual representation scheme,
such as flexibility, scope restriction, and standardization
of terminology such that effective communication may
occur. Using values to represent this scheme provides
those requirements and contributes a way to measure
equivocality. A given value profile is likely to result in
multiple interpretations depending on the complexity of
the context. Further, Hine et al. [28] suggest that an
organization must strive to understand belief variety,
which is the number of beliefs in a given interpretation.
By using a discrete value set presented as a value profile
unique to an individual, the VBDM model defines not
only belief variety but also the characteristics associated
with each belief.
9.3. Research implications
The VBDM model discussed here begets avenues for
future research. Further testing of the applicability of the
values in the workplace is possible; testing the development and synthesis processes in a group setting is
another possibility. Further refining of the PD component and development of the perspective synthesis component should also be considered.
It is possible that the VBDM model may be a potential implementation of an interpretive organizational
learning system (one such system is that of Hine and
Goul [29]). The VBDM model has been conceptualized
in the image of a decision-support system, although

1601

usage of a system built on its foundation is not limited to
that. A design as flexible as the VBDM model can be
used for decision-support, learning support, or as a
component of a knowledge management system. Enhanced perspective development will naturally increase
an individual's (or organization's) mental model and
therefore affect decision-making and other information
intensive processes such as knowledge generation. Recent research in negotiation support [59] indicates that
synthesizing decision-makers' mental models not only
increases the level of consensus with the group, but
improves the social climate in which the groups operate.
Such cohesiveness can enhance the decision-making
process by reducing conflict, which is a goal of the
VBDM model. All decision-making, information gathering, and knowledge generation scenarios require some
negotiation to reduce the conflict inherent in acceptable
information and solutions.
To achieve the goal of multiple perspectives, organizations should encourage individuals to think more
broadly about problems, and to consider the viewpoints
of others. When an individual strongly favors one or
more of the six value-based perspectives, encouraging
this growth may be difficult. Recent research [22–24]
indicates that systems designed to facilitate the development of multiple perspectives may be beneficial in
encouraging individuals to overcome their innate mental
models during specific problem-solving contexts. It may
be necessary to rely on specially developed technology
to aid this process, particularly to provide the ability
to update the mental models of organizational members and ultimately the collective mental model of an
organization.
Recent advances in technology may enable organizations to facilitate the process of populating organizational memory with multiple perspectives, thus enabling
organizational members to refer to those perspectives
and the knowledge produced as needed. This will effectively update and expand both individual and
collective mental models. Courtney [12] suggests several
Web-based technological avenues whereby this may be
possible—for instance, chats, email, applets, and knowledge repositories. A system based on the VBDM model
may incorporate any (or many) of these technologies.
Agent technology is also a promising avenue for
implementation of complex systems [24,25].
Another avenue for research is further development
of the behavioral aspects of the system. Do individuals
using a system such as the VBDM model generate more
alternative solutions than individuals without such support? Can such a system, over time, mediate potential
bias effects of strongly held values of an individual?

1602

D.J. Hall, R.A. Davis / Decision Support Systems 43 (2007) 1588–1604

Does use of the system promote faster, more efficient, or
better decisions? Is there enough variety of value
profiles in a given group of decision-makers to achieve
the objective of synthesizing multiple perspectives?
10. Conclusion
As organizations continue to strive for sustainable
gains in productivity and excellence, the importance of
effective decision-making and organizational learning
continues to increase. The environment faced by organizations today is often complex and very dynamic. It is
critical that organizations consider the contribution that
multiple perspectives make to decision-making and
learning. In a particular decision context such as a
novel situation, crisis, or contexts that evoke emotion, a
decision-maker with a set of personal values on which
their perspective is based may not be able to identify all
sides of the issue under consideration. Yet, being able to
view the decision environment from multiple perspectives enhances the decision-maker's ability to make
better-informed choices. The value-based decisionmaking model described in this paper provides a
framework that organizations and researchers can use
to better understand and facilitate the use of multiple
perspectives in decision-making and organizational
learning.
The foundations of the VBDM model are Courtney's
[12] decision-making and knowledge management paradigm and the conflict/consensus process of interpretive
organizational learning [28,29]. The Courtney paradigm
has been enhanced by the addition of six value-based
perspectives which form the foundation of the individual
representation scheme of interpretive organizational
learning. Understanding these values is integral to understanding value-based decision behavior. Effective
decision-making and learning require consideration of
multiple perspectives; this model will enhance the understanding of individual values and their place in organizational learning and decision-making.
References
[1] G.W. Allport, P.E. Vernon, C. Lindzey, A Study of Values,
Riverside, Chicago, IL, 1970.
[2] C. Argyris, D.A. Schön, Organizational Learning II, AddisonWesley Publishing Company, Reading, MA, 1996.
[3] J. Barnett, K. Bass, G. Brown, Religiosity, ethical ideology, and
intentions to report a peer's wrongdoing, Journal of Business
Ethics 15 (November 1996) 1161–1174.
[4] J.M. Bartunek, J.R. Gordon, R.P. Weathersby, Developing
‘complicated’ understanding in administrators, Academy of
Management Review 8 (2) (1983) 273–284.

[5] D.J. Bem, Self-perception: an alternative interpretation of
cognitive dissonance phenomena, Psychological Review 74 (2)
(1967) 183–200.
[6] I. Benbasat, L.-H. Lim, The effects of group, task, content, and
technology variables on the usefulness of group support systems:
a meta-analysis of experimental studies, Small Group Research
24 (4) (1993) 430–462.
[7] K.L. Betttenhausen, K.J. Murnighan, The emergence of norms in
competitive decision making groups, Administrative Science
Quarterly 30 (1985) 350–372.
[8] R.J. Boland Jr., R.V. Tenkasi, Perspective making and perspective taking in communities of knowledge, Organization Science 6
(4) (1995) 350–372.
[9] R.H. Bonczek, C.W. Holsapple, A.B. Whinston, Foundations of
Decision Support Systems, Academic Press, New York, 1981.
[10] C.W. Churchman, The Design of Inquiring Systems: Basic
Concepts of Systems and Organizations, Basic Books, Inc., New
York, NY, 1971.
[11] J.D. Couger, L.F. Higgins, S.C. McIntyre, (Un)Structured creativity in information systems organizations, MIS Quarterly 17 (4)
(1993) 375–397.
[12] J.F. Courtney, Decision making and knowledge management in
inquiring organizations: a new decision-making paradigm for
DSS, Decision Support Systems Special Issue on Knowledge
Management 31 (1) (2001) 17–38.
[13] F.D. Davis, Perceived usefulness, perceived ease of use, and user
acceptance of information technology, MIS Quarterly 13 (1989)
318–340.
[14] G. DeSanctis, M.S. Poole, M. Limayem, D. Luitjens, "The GDSS
Research Project: Experimental Task Materials," MISRC-WP92-07, Management Information Systems Research Center,
Curtis L. Carlson School of Management, University of
Minnesota (1992).
[15] A.J. DiBella, E.C. Nevis, How Organizations Learn: An Integrated Strategy for Building Learning Capability, Jossey-Bass
Inc., San Francisco, 1998.
[16] W.C. Frederick, Anchoring values in nature: toward a theory of
business values, Business Ethics Quarterly 2 (1) (1992) 283–302.
[17] D. Giola, P.P. Poole, Scripts in organizational behavior, Academy
of Management Review 9 (1984) 449–459.
[18] W.D. Guth, R. Tagiuri, Personal values and corporate strategy,
Harvard Business Review 43 (5) (1965) 123–132.
[19] B. Hall, O. Harari, B. Ledig, M. Tondow, Manual for the HallTonna Inventory of Values, Paulist Press, New Jersey, 1986.
[20] D.J. Hall, Testing Performance and Perspective in an Integrated
Knowledge Management System, College Station, 2002.
[21] D.J. Hall, D. Paradice, Do you do as you value? Investigating
value-based decision bias and mediation, Communications of the
ACM (in press).
[22] D.J. Hall, D.B. Paradice, Philosophical foundations for a
learning-oriented knowledge management system for decision
support, Decision Support Systems 39 (3) (2005) 445–461.
[23] D.J. Hall, D.B. Paradice, J.F. Courtney, Building a theoretical
foundation for a learning-oriented knowledge management
system, Journal of Information Technology Theory and Application (JITTA) 5 (2) (2003) 63–89.
[24] D.J. Hall, Y. Guo, R.A. Davis, C. Cegielski, Extending unbounded
systems thinking with agent-oriented modeling: conceptualizing a
multiple-perspective decision-making system, Decision Support
Systems 41 (1) (2005) 279–295.
[25] D.J. Hall, Y. Guo, R.A. Davis, C. Cegielski, Technological
support for a learning-oriented knowledge management system,

D.J. Hall, R.A. Davis / Decision Support Systems 43 (2007) 1588–1604
Proceedings of the Americas Conference on Information
Systems, Omaha, NE, 2005.
[26] O.J. Harvey, D.E. Hunt, H.M. Shroder, Conceptual Systems and
Personality Organization, Wiley, New York, NY, 1961.
[27] K.M. Hilmer, A.R. Dennis, Stimulating thinking: cultivating
better decisions with groupware through categorization, Journal
of Management Information Systems 17 (3) (2001) 93–114.
[28] M.J. Hine, J.B. Gasen, M. Goul, Emerging issues in interpretive
organizational learning, The DATA BASE for Advances in
Information Systems 27 (3) (1996) 49–62.
[29] M. Hine, M. Goul, The design, development, and validation of a
knowledge-based organizational learning support system, Journal of Management Information Systems 15 (2) (1998) 119–152.
[30] G. Huber, Cognitive style as a basis for MIS design: much ado
about nothing? Management Science 29 (5) (1983) 567–597.
[31] T.S. Isaack, Intuition: an ignored dimension of management,
Academy of Management Review 3 (4) (1978) 917–921.
[32] R. Keeney, Value-Focused Thinking, Harvard University Press,
Cambridge, MA, 1992.
[33] R. Keeney, Foundations for making smart decisions, IIE
Solutions 31 (5) (1999) 24–30.
[34] D.E. Kiranne, Managing values: a systematic approach to
business ethics, Training and Development Journal November
(1990) 53–60.
[35] L. Kohlberg, Stage and sequence: the cognitive developmental
approach to socialization, in: D.A. Goslin (Ed.), Handbook of
Socialization Theory and Research, Academic Press, San Diego,
CA, 1969, pp. 347–480.
[36] T.R. Konold, J.J. Glutting, P.A. McDermott, J.C. Kush, M.M.
Watkins, Structure and diagnostic benefits of a normative subtest
taxonomy developed from the WISC-III standardization sample,
Journal of School Psychology 37 (1999) 29–48.
[37] R.E. Kopelman, J.L. Rovenpor, M. Guan, The study of values:
construction of the fourth edition, Journal of Vocational Behavior
62 (2) (2003) 203–220.
[38] R.M. Krauss, S.R. Fussell, Perspective taking in communication:
representations of others' knowledge in reference, Social
Cognition 9 (1) (1991) 2–24.
[39] K. Kumar, M. Thibodeaux, Differences in values systems of
Anglo-American and Far Eastern students: effects of American
business education, Journal of Business Ethics 17 (1998)
253–262.
[40] F.-Y. Kuo, Managerial intuition and the development of executive support systems, Decision Support Systems 24 (2) (1998)
89–103.
[41] D. Lubinski, D. Schmidt, C. Persson Benbow, A 20-year stability
analysis of the study of values for intellectually gifted individuals
from adolescence to adulthood, Journal of Applied Psychology
81 (4) (1996) 443–451.
[42] R.O. Mason, I. Mitroff, A program for research on management
information systems, Management Science 19 (5) (1973)
475–487.
[43] P.A. McDermott, J.W. Fantuzzo, J.J. Glutting, M.W. Watkins,
A.R. Baggaley, Illustrations of meaning in the ipsative assessment
of children's ability, Journal of Special Education 25 (1992)
504–526.
[44] B.M. Meglino, E.C. Ravlin, Individual values in organizations:
concepts, Controversies and Research, Management 24 (3)
(1998) 351–389.
[45] B.E. Mennecke, J. Valacich, Information is what you make of it:
the influence of group history and computer support on information sharing, decision quality, and member perceptions, Jour-

1603

nal of Management Information Systems 15 (2) (1998)
173–197.
[46] I.I. Mitroff, H.A. Linstone, The Unbounded Mind: Breaking the
Chains of Traditional Business Thinking, Oxford University
Press, New York, 1993.
[47] D.A. Norman, User centered system design, in: D.A. Norman, S.
Draper (Eds.), Cognitive Engineering, Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates, Hillsdale, NJ, 1986, pp. 31–61.
[48] C.A. O'Reilly III, J.A. Chatman, D.F. Caldwell, People and
organizational culture: a profile comparison approach to assessing person-organization fit, Academy of Management 34 (3)
(1991) 487–516.
[49] S.K. Parker, C.M. Axtell, Seeing another viewpoint: antecedents
and outcomes of employee perspective taking, Academy of
Management Journal 44 (6) (2001) 1085–1100.
[50] A. Pinsonneault, K. Kraemer, The impact of technological
support on groups: an assessment of empirical research, Decision
Support Systems 5 (2) (1989) 197–216.
[51] W.F. Pounds, The process of problem finding, Industrial
Management Review 11 (1969) 1–19.
[52] E.H. Schein, Organizational Culture and Leadership, Jossey
Bass, San Francisco, CA, 1992.
[53] H.A. Simon, The structure of ill-structured problems, Artificial
Intelligence 4 (1973) 181–201.
[54] G.F. Smith, Defining managerial problems: a framework for
prescriptive theorizing, Management Science 35 (8) (1989)
963–981.
[55] E. Soule, Managerial moral strategies—in search of a few good
principles, Academy of Management Review 27 (1) (2002)
114–124.
[56] E. Spranger, Types of men; the Psychology and Ethics of
Personality, Johnson Reprints, New York, NY, 1928/1966.
[57] G. Stasser, D. Stewart, Discovery of hidden profiles by decisionmaking groups: solving a problem versus making a judgment,
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 63 (1) (1992)
426–434.
[58] E.A. Stohr, B.R. Konsynski, Information Systems and Decision
Processes: Charting New Directions for DSS Research: A MultiDisciplinary Approach, IEEE Computer Society Press, Los
Alamitos, CA, 1992.
[59] R.I. Swaab, T. Postmes, P. Neijens, M.H. Kiers, A.C.M.
Dumay, Multiparty negotiation support: the role of visualization's influence on the development of shared mental models,
Journal of Management Information Systems 19 (1) (2002)
129–150.
[60] D.L. Swanson, Toward an integrative theory of business and
society: a research strategy for corporate social performance,
Academy of Management Review 24 (3) (1999) 506–521.
[61] R. Vahidov, R. Elrod, Incorporating critique and argumentation
in DSS, Decision Support Systems 26 (3) (1999) 249–258.
[62] K.A. Wade-Benzoni, A.J. Hoffman, L.L. Thompson, D.A.
Moore, J.J. Gillespie, M.H. Bazerman, Barriers to resolution in
ideologically based negotiations: the role of values and institutions, Academy of Management Review 27 (1) (2002) 41–57.
[63] R.T. Watson, G. DeSanctis, M.S. Poole, Using a GDSS to
facilitate group consensus: some intended and unintended
consequences, MIS Quarterly 12 (3) (1988) 463–480.
[64] K.E. Weick, The Social Psychology of Organizing, Random
House, New York, 1979.
[65] R.W. Zmud, Individual differences and MIS success: a review of
the empirical literature, Management Science 25 (10) (1979)
966–979.

1604

D.J. Hall, R.A. Davis / Decision Support Systems 43 (2007) 1588–1604

Dianne J. Hall is an Assistant
Professor of Management Information Systems at Auburn
University. She received her
doctorate at Texas A&M University where she also taught
for several years. She has also
worked as a consultant. Her
work has appeared in both
academic and practitioner journals such as Communications
of the ACM, Decision Support
Systems, Journal of Financial
Services Marketing, OR Insight, the International Journal
of Knowledge Management,
Journal of Information Technology Theory and Application, and
Knowledge and Innovation and in several books. Her current research
interests include applications of information technologies in support of
knowledge management as well as multiple-perspective and valuebased decision-making.

Robert A. Davis is an Associate Professor in the Computer
Information Systems and
Quantitative Methods Department of the McCoy College of
Business Administration at
Texas State University-San
Marcos. He earned his MBA
and Ph.D. degrees from the
University of South Carolina.
He is the co-author of Operations Management: Concepts
in Manufacturing and Services. He has published many
articles dealing with the effective and efficient utilization of resources for operations and supply
chain management. His articles have appeared in academic journals
such as Management Science, Decision Support Systems, Engineering
Costs and Production Economics, Journal of Marketing, National
Productivity Review, International Journal of Production Research,
Competitiveness Review, Journal of Business Research, and Production and Inventory Management Journal. He has served as CoPrincipal Investigator on several research projects with industrial
clients dealing operations and supply chain issues.

